1. Phys Life Rev. 2025 Mar;52:80-106. doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2024.11.017. Epub 2024
 Dec 5.

The major-minor mode dichotomy in music perception.

Carraturo G(1), Pando-Naude V(2), Costa M(3), Vuust P(2), Bonetti L(4), Brattico 
E(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Music in the Brain, Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus 
University and The Royal Academy of Music, Aarhus/Aalborg, Aarhus, Denmark; 
Department of Education, Psychology, Communication, University of Bari Aldo 
Moro, Italy; Department of Psychology, University of Bologna, Italy.
(2)Center for Music in the Brain, Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus 
University and The Royal Academy of Music, Aarhus/Aalborg, Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Bologna, Italy.
(4)Center for Music in the Brain, Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus 
University and The Royal Academy of Music, Aarhus/Aalborg, Aarhus, Denmark; 
Department of Psychology, University of Bologna, Italy; Centre for Eudaimonia 
and Human Flourishing, Linacre College, University of Oxford, United Kingdom; 
Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Center for Music in the Brain, Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus 
University and The Royal Academy of Music, Aarhus/Aalborg, Aarhus, Denmark; 
Department of Education, Psychology, Communication, University of Bari Aldo 
Moro, Italy. Electronic address: elvira.brattico@clin.au.dk.

In Western tonal music, major and minor modes are recognized as the primary 
musical features in eliciting emotional responses. The underlying correlates of 
this dichotomy in music perception have been extensively investigated through 
decades of psychological and neuroscientific research, yielding plentiful yet 
often discordant results that highlight the complexity and individual 
differences in how these modes are perceived. This variability suggests that a 
deeper understanding of major-minor mode perception in music is still needed. We 
present the first comprehensive systematic review and meta-analysis, providing 
both qualitative and quantitative syntheses of major-minor mode perception and 
its behavioural and neural correlates. The qualitative synthesis includes 70 
studies, revealing significant diversity in how the major-minor dichotomy has 
been empirically investigated. Most studies focused on adults, considered 
participants' expertise, used real-life musical stimuli, conducted behavioural 
evaluations, and were predominantly performed with Western listeners. 
Meta-analyses of behavioural, electroencephalography, and neuroimaging data (37 
studies) consistently show that major and minor modes elicit distinct neural and 
emotional responses, though these differences are heavily influenced by 
subjective perception. Based on our findings, we propose a framework to describe 
a Major-Minor Mode(l) of music perception and its correlates, incorporating 
individual factors such as age, expertise, cultural background, and emotional 
disorders. Moreover, this work explores the cultural and historical implications 
of the major-minor dichotomy in music, examining its origins, universality, and 
emotional associations across both Western and non-Western contexts. By 
considering individual differences and acoustic characteristics, we contribute 
to a broader understanding of how musical frameworks develop across cultures. 
Limitations, implications, and suggestions for future research are discussed, 
including potential clinical applications for mood regulation and emotional 
disorders, alongside recommendations for experimental paradigms in investigating 
major-minor modes.

Copyright Â© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plrev.2024.11.017
PMID: 39721138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.