1. R Soc Open Sci. 2024 Nov 6;11(11):241623. doi: 10.1098/rsos.241623.
eCollection  2024 Nov.

Appreciation of singing and speaking voices is highly idiosyncratic.

Bruder C(1), Frieler K(1), Larrouy-Maestri P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(2)Center for Language, Music, and Emotion (CLaME), New York, NY, USA.

Voice preferences are an integral part of interpersonal interactions and shape 
how people connect with each other. While a large number of studies have 
investigated the mechanisms behind (speaking) voice attractiveness, very little 
research was dedicated to other types of vocalizations. In this Registered 
Report, we proposed to investigate voice preferences with an integrative 
approach. To this end, we used a newly recorded and validated stimulus set of 
contrasting vocalizations by 22 highly trained female singers speaking and 
singing the same material (in Brazilian Portuguese) in contrasting styles (sung 
as a lullaby, as a pop song or as an opera aria; and spoken aloud as if directed 
to an adult audience and as if directed to an infant). We asked 62 participants 
to rate these vocalizations in terms of how much they liked them; and we 
compared the amount of shared taste (that is, how much participants agreed in 
their preferences) across styles. We found highly idiosyncratic preferences 
across all styles. Our predictions concerning shared taste were not confirmed: 
although shared taste was higher for lullaby than for pop singing, it was 
unexpectedly higher for operatic than pop singing, and higher for 
infant-directed than adult-directed speech. Conversely, our prediction of 
limited consistency in average preferences for some singers across styles was 
confirmed, contradicting sexual selection-based ideas of singing and speaking as 
'backup' signals of individual fitness. Our findings draw attention to the role 
of individual differences in voice preferences and highlight the need for a 
broader approach to understanding the underlying mechanisms of voice 
preferences. Stage 1 recommendation and review history: 
https://rr.peercommunityin.org/articles/rec?id=357. Stage 2 recommendation and 
review history: https://rr.peercommunityin.org/articles/rec?id=802.

Â© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1098/rsos.241623
PMCID: PMC11537763
PMID: 39508000

Conflict of interest statement: We declare we have no competing interests.