1. Brain Behav. 2024 Sep;14(9):e3629. doi: 10.1002/brb3.3629.

The safety and effectiveness of music medicine as an intervention for 
depression: A systematic evaluation and re-evaluation.

Zhong D(1), Cheng H(2), Pan Z(3), Liu Y(2), Liu P(1), Li J(1), Chen J(1), Deng 
Y(4), Ou X(1), Li H(5), Kong X(1).

Author information:
(1)Nanhai Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan University, Foshan, 
China.
(2)Institute of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 
China.
(3)Graduate School, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Institute of Integrative Medicine, Hunan University of Chinese Medicine, 
Changsha, China.
(5)Department of geriatrics, Foshan Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Foshan, China.

BACKGROUND: As the methodological quality and evidence level of the existing 
systematic reviews (SRs) on music as an intervention for depression have not 
been thoroughly evaluated, a systematic evaluation and re-evaluation (SERE) was 
conducted.
METHODS: Multiple databases including PubMed, Web of Science, Embase, China 
National Knowledge Infrastructure, SinoMed, Wanfang, and the VIP database were 
searched for SRs and meta-analyses (MAs) on the effectiveness of music as an 
intervention for depression. The literature screening, evaluation of 
methodological quality, and assessment of evidence level were carried out by a 
team of researchers. The methodological quality was evaluated using the 
Assessment of Multiple Systematic Reviews 2 (AMSTAR 2) scale in accordance with 
the 2020 Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses 
(PRISMA) guidelines, and the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, 
Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) criteria were utilized to assess the level 
of evidence.
RESULTS: A total of 18 SRs were included in the analysis. The 2020 PRISMA 
guidelines were utilized to evaluate various aspects such as search terms, 
funding sources, statistical methods for missing values, subgroup and 
sensitivity analyses, certainty assessment, excluded literature citations, 
assessment of publication bias, protocol information, conflicts of interest, and 
data availability, which were rarely reported. The evaluation of the studies 
using the AMSTAR 2 scale revealed that one article was rated as high quality, 
six were rated as low quality, and 11 were rated as very low quality. Based on 
the GRADE criteria evaluation, the quality of the evidence was found to be 
inconsistent, with reports primarily consisting of medium-quality evidence.
CONCLUSION: The methodological quality of SRs/MAs of music as an intervention in 
depression is generally poor, and the level of evidence is generally low.

Â© 2024 The Author(s). Brain and Behavior published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.3629
PMCID: PMC11391024
PMID: 39262200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.