1. BMJ Open. 2024 Sep 17;14(9):e078526. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2023-078526.

Efficacy of reminiscence therapy with different media on cognitive function and 
negative moods for older adult patients who had a stroke: protocol of a network 
meta-analysis.

Liu Q(1), Liu L(1), Wang F(1), Tan L(1), Cheng H(2), Hu X(3).

Author information:
(1)Innovation Center of Nursing Research, Nursing Key Laboratory of Sichuan 
Province, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(2)University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China.
(3)Innovation Center of Nursing Research, Nursing Key Laboratory of Sichuan 
Province, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, China 
huxiuying@scu.edu.cn.

INTRODUCTION: Stroke is a common cause of death and disability in the older 
adult and increases the risk and severity of cognitive impairment, which is a 
factor for long-term death among stroke survivors. Some studies have focused on 
the effects of reminiscence therapy with different media on stroke survivors. It 
is currently unclear which is the best medium. This protocol aims to deal with 
this problem by using a network meta-analysis.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: Published randomised controlled trials will be included if 
reminiscence therapy plus usual care was applied in older adult patients who had 
a stroke in the experimental group and usual care was applied in the control 
group. Six electronic databases will be searched from their inception to August 
2023, including the Cochrane Library, CINAHL, PubMed, Web of Science, Medline 
and Embase. The media of reminiscence therapy may include (but not restricted 
to) old photos, music or movies. Outcomes will be cognitive function and 
negative moods. Study selection, data extraction and quality assessment will be 
performed independently by two reviewers. The risk of bias (RoB) of the included 
studies will be evaluated in accordance with the Cochrane Collaboration's RoB 
tool. The evidence quality will be measured based on the Grading of 
Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation. To compare the efficacy 
of reminiscence therapy with different media, standard pairwise meta-analysis 
and Bayesian network meta-analysis will be conducted. The probabilities of 
intervention for all outcomes will be ranked based on the surface under the 
cumulative ranking curve.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Ethical approval is not required for reviewing 
published studies. The findings will be submitted to a peer-reviewed journal for 
review and publication to provide important evidence for clinicians and 
guideline developers to determine interventions for older adult patients who had 
a stroke.
PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42023447828.

Â© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2024. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2023-078526
PMCID: PMC11409348
PMID: 39289018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.