1. Sci Rep. 2024 Jul 17;14(1):16532. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-66836-x.

Effect of music therapy on anxiety and depression in breast cancer patients: 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Xu Z(1), Liu C(1), Fan W(2), Li S(1), Li Y(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Physical Education, Shanghai University of Sport, Shanghai, China.
(2)School of Music, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(3)School of Physical Education, Shanghai University of Sport, Shanghai, China. 
yuzhang07@126.com.

To systematically evaluate the intervention effect of music therapy on anxiety 
and depression in breast cancer patients. Randomised controlled trial (RCT) on 
music therapy for anxiety and depression in breast cancer patients was searched 
from 7 major databases, PubMed, Embase, the Cochrane Library, WOS, CNIC, 
Wanfang, and Wipro, spanning the period of library construction to 23 October 
2023, and the literature screening of music therapy for anxiety or depression in 
breast cancer patients was carried out by 2 experimentalists, each of whom 
conducted a literature screening RCT independently of the other anxiety or 
depression in a RCT. Methodological quality was evaluated using the PEDro scale; 
GRADE profiler software for quality of evidence; and RevMan 5.4 was used for 
effect size merging and forest plots; publication bias tests and sensitivity 
analyses were performed using Stata 17.0; and standardized mean difference (SMD) 
and 95% CI were used as the effect statistics. A total of 13 RCTs with 1326 
subjects (aged 18-70 years) were included in the literature, with a mean PEDro 
score of 6.8, and the literature was overall of good methodological quality. 
Meta-analysis showed that music therapy improved anxiety in breast cancer 
patients (841 cases), with a combined effect size (SMD = - 0.82, 95% CI [- 1.03, 
- 0.61] and P < 0.001); and improved depression in breast cancer patients (387 
cases) with a combined effect size (SMD = - 0.76, 95% CI [- 1.15, - 0.38], 
P < 0.001). Subgroup analyses showed that music intervention with off-site music 
(757 cases) and music choice of non-self-selected music (537 cases) had the best 
effect on anxiety improvement, with corresponding combined effect sizes 
(SMD = - 0.88, P < 0.001; SMD = - 0.83, P < 0.001), respectively; followed by an 
intervention length of < 30 min (589 cases), a frequency of 2 times/day (382 
cases), and intervention period of 2-3 weeks (101 cases) had the best effect on 
anxiety improvement, and the corresponding combined effect sizes were 
(SMD = - 0.80, P < 0.001; SMD = - 0.91, P < 0.001; SMD = - 1.02, P < 0.001), 
respectively; and the music selection was the choice of one's own favourite 
music among the expert recommendations (219 cases) (270 cases) had the best 
effect on the improvement of depressed mood, with combined effect sizes of 
(SMD = - 1.15, P < 0.001; SMD = - 0.71, P < 0.001) and music with an 
intervention duration of 30 min (287 cases), an intervention frequency of 1 
time/day (348 cases), and an intervention period of 2-4 weeks (120 cases), 
respectively, with corresponding combined effect sizes of (SMD = - 0.75, 
P < 0.001; SMD = - 0.86, P < 0.001; SMD = - 1.06, P < 0.001), respectively. 
Music therapy can improve anxiety and depression in breast cancer patients, and 
the level of evidence is moderate. Although the heterogeneity between studies is 
high, which may lead to bias in the results, we explored the source of 
heterogeneity through subgroup and sensitivity analyses, providing a good 
evidence-based basis for clinical practice. The heterogeneity of anxiety and 
depression was explored by subgroup analysis, with anxiety due to music duration 
and music cycle; and depression due to intervention cycles and music duration. 
Sensitivity analyses also identified music duration and music cycle as 
contributing to the heterogeneity. Also, this study has some limitations since 
the included literature did not take into account the duration of the disease, 
education, and family economic status and did not categorize the age stages. 
This study found that music therapy improves anxiety and depression in breast 
cancer patients and the results can be used as a basis for clinical practice and 
researcher enquiry. This research has been registered on the INPLASY platform ( 
https://inplasy.com/contact/ ) under the number: INPLASY2023100057.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-66836-x
PMCID: PMC11255342
PMID: 39019965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.