1. J Music Ther. 2022 Sep 19;59(3):239-268. doi: 10.1093/jmt/thac006.

Israeli Parents' Lived Experiences of Music Therapy With Their Preterm Infants 
Post-Hospitalization.

Epstein S(1), Elefant C(1), Ghetti C(2).

Author information:
(1)School for Creative Arts Therapies, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.
(2)The Grieg Academy-Department of Music, University of Bergen, GAMUT, Bergen, 
Norway.

In the current study, we aimed to explore the lived experience of Israeli 
parents who engaged in musical dialogues with their preterm infants during music 
therapy (MT) after being discharged from the neonatal intensive care unit 
(NICU), as a part of the multinational LongSTEP RCT. Seven participants of the 
main trial were invited to engage in semi-structured in-depth interviews 
intertwining listening to audio recordings from their music therapy sessions in 
an adapted interpersonal process recall (IPR) procedure. The interviews were 
transcribed and analyzed using interpretative phenomenological analysis (IPA). 
We understood the participants' experiences to reflect two main themes: 1) Music 
therapy as a potential means of transformation in communication skills, 
resourcefulness and sense of agency; and 2) emotional and musical preconditions 
for parental engagement in MT. The findings illustrate how a specific group of 
Israeli parents experienced MT as offering them a means of expanding their 
relationship with their preterm infants after discharge. Based on our findings, 
we recommend that music therapists consider parents' musical and emotional 
resources during post-discharge MT to meet the individual needs of families.

Â© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of American 
Music Therapy Association. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jmt/thac006
PMID: 35661217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]