1. Aging Ment Health. 2023 Jun;27(6):1056-1067. doi:
10.1080/13607863.2022.2116404.  Epub 2022 Sep 8.

Sensory-based interventions for the immediate de-escalation of agitation 
in people with dementia: A systematic review.

Cheung DSK(1), Wang SS(1), Li Y(1), Ho KHM(2), Kwok RKH(1), Mo SH(1), 
Bressington D(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong.
(2)The Nethersole School of Nursing, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University 
of Hong Kong, Ma Liu Shui, Hong Kong.
(3)College of Nursing and Midwifery, Charles Darwin University, Casuarina, 
Northern Territory, Australia.

Objectives: Sensory-based interventions are commonly used to reduce the 
occurrence of agitation in people with dementia over extended periods. However, 
the evidence regarding their immediate de-escalation effects is unclear. The 
objectives of this systematic review are to (a) identify which sensory-based 
interventions have been used for de-escalating agitation and (b) examine the 
immediate effects of these interventions on de-escalating agitation in people 
with dementia.Methods: A systematic review was performed in accordance with 
PRISMA guidelines. Data sources were identified by searching Embase, Medline, 
PsycINFO, and CINAHL for publications up to 2 March 2022. The de-escalating 
agitation effect had to be measured during the intervention or within 15 min 
after commencing the treatment. Only randomized controlled trials or 
quasi-experimental studies published in English were included.Results: Nine 
studies met the inclusion criteria: two randomized controlled trials, one 
cross-over study, and six quasi-experimental studies. All were conducted in 
Western countries, involving a total of 246 participants. Music-related 
interventions were investigated in seven studies, and a positive effect on 
de-escalating agitation was found, with no side-effects. All of the studies had 
methodological limitations, including a single group design, blinding, an 
insufficient sample size, and imprecisely reported results.Conclusion: There is 
a profound dearth of rigorous studies examining the immediate agitation 
de-escalating effects of sensory-based interventions on people with dementia. 
However, the limited evidence on music-related interventions is encouraging. 
More rigorous research is recommended to confirm the effects.

DOI: 10.1080/13607863.2022.2116404
PMID: 36073320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]