1. Complement Med Res. 2024;31(6):540-550. doi: 10.1159/000540263. Epub 2024 Aug 
22.

Effect of Music-Based Interventions on Maternal and Fetal Parameters during 
Pregnancy: A Systematic Review.

Dogan-Gangal A(1), Akin B(2), Kocoglu-Tanyer D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology Nursing, Faculty of Nursing, Gazi 
University, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Nursing Department, Faculty of Health Sciences, Lokman Hekim University, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Public Health Nursing Department, Faculty of Nursing, Selcuk University, 
Konya, Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: Music is a non-pharmacological intervention often used to improve 
maternal mental health during pregnancy. However, there is limited evidence 
regarding the effectiveness of music-based interventions on maternal and fetal 
parameters during pregnancy. We present a systematic review of the available 
research literature on the effects of music interventions on maternal and fetal 
parameters.
METHODS: A comprehensive literature search was conducted on the Web of Science, 
PubMed, ScienceDirect, Scopus, CINAHL, MEDLINE, Cochrane, ProQuest, and Turkish 
databases. The review included randomized controlled and quasi-experimental 
studies. Two independent authors evaluated the methodological quality of each 
study using the Quality Assessment Tool for Quantitative Studies. The study was 
registered in PROSPERO (CRD42018102914).
RESULTS: The literature review yielded a total of 723 studies. Among these 
studies, 13 were included in this study. Most of the studies involving low-risk 
pregnant women reported that music had no effect on stress but reduced anxiety 
and depression. The effect of music on pregnant women's blood pressure varied 
depending on the presence of medical conditions that could affect their blood 
pressure. While some studies showed that music interventions effectively 
increased fetal movement and acceleration, the available findings were limited.
CONCLUSION: Healthcare professionals can use simple, cost-effective, and 
practical music interventions to improve maternal mental health during pregnancy 
without neglecting medical treatment. Future well-designed studies are 
recommended to investigate the effects of music on maternal psychological, 
physiological parameters and fetal parameters in high-risk pregnancies.

Publisher: <title>Einleitung</title> Musik ist eine nicht-medikamentöse 
Intervention, die häufig eingesetzt wird, um die mentale Gesundheit von 
Schwangeren zu verbessern. Es gibt jedoch nur begrenzte Evidenz zur Wirksamkeit 
musikbasierter Interventionen auf maternale und fetale Parameter während der 
Schwangerschaft. Wir legen hier eine systematische Übersicht der verfügbaren 
Forschungsliteratur über die Effekte von Musikinterventionen auf maternale und 
fetale Parameter vor.<title>Methoden</title> In den Datenbanken Web of Science, 
PubMed, Science Direct, Scopus, CINAHL, MEDLINE, Cochrane und ProQuest sowie 
türkischen Datenbanken wurde eine umfassende Literaturrecherche durchgeführt. In 
die Übersicht eingeschlossen wurden randomisierte, kontrollierte und 
quasi-experimentelle Studien. Zwei unabhängige Autoren evaluierten die 
methodische Qualität der einzelnen Studie mit dem Quality Assessment Tool for 
Quantitative Studies. Die Studie wurde in PROSPERO registriert 
(CRD42018102914).<title>Ergebnisse</title> Die Literaturrecherche ergab 
insgesamt 723 Studien. Hiervon wurden 13 in diese Studie eingeschlossen. Die 
meisten Studien, an denen Frauen mit niedrigem Schwangerschaftsrisiko 
teilnahmen, ergaben, dass die Musik keine Auswirkung auf die Stressbelastung 
hatte, jedoch Angst und Depression reduzierte. Der Effekt der Musik auf den 
Blutdruck der Schwangeren variierte je nach Vorliegen weiterer medizinischer 
Gegebenheiten, die jeweils den Blutdruck beeinflussen konnten. Manche Studien 
stellten zwar eine effektive Zunahme fetaler Bewegungen und Akzelerationen fest, 
die verfügbaren Daten waren jedoch begrenzt.<title>Schlussfolgerung</title> Das 
medizinische Fachpersonal kann Musikinterventionen als einfache, 
kosteneffiziente und praktikable Maβnahme einsetzen, um die mentale Gesundheit 
von Schwangeren zu verbessern, wobei die medizinische Behandlung nicht 
vernachlässigt werden darf. Für die Zukunft werden gut aufgebaute Studien 
empfohlen, um die Effekte von Musik auf psychische und physische Parameter der 
Mutter sowie auf fetale Parameter in Hochrisiko-Schwangerschaften zu 
untersuchen.

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000540263
PMCID: PMC11633902
PMID: 39173611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.