1. Front Psychiatry. 2022 Jun 16;13:878866. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.878866. 
eCollection 2022.

Effects of Arts and Psychomotor Therapies in Personality Disorders. Developing a 
Treatment Guideline Based on a Systematic Review Using GRADE.

Haeyen S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department 'Scelta', Expert Center for Personality Disorders, GGNet Centre of 
Mental Health, Apeldoorn, Netherlands.
(2)Special Research Group 'Arts and Psychomotor Therapies in Personality 
Disorders', HAN University of Applied Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands.

What is the effect of arts and psychomotor therapies, using art, dance, drama, 
music, movement and body awareness, in personality disorder treatment? This was 
explored by developing a treatment guideline based on a systematic review using 
the GRADE system within the context of the Dutch national multidisciplinary 
guidelines for treatment of personality disorders. Conclusions were formulated 
by a work group and based on the scientific substantiation and were integrated 
with other indications in the functioning of arts and psychomotor therapies in 
personality disorders. The first general search yielded 1,900 records which was 
brought back to 53 full-texts. Ultimately, 1 RCT and 2 pilot studies were 
included. Recommendations for treatment are that arts and psychomotor therapies 
are included in treatment, independent of age, sex or specific diagnostic 
characteristics. Arts and psychomotor therapies can be considered for purposes 
of coming into emotional contact with difficult aspects of patients and their 
experiences, to work on goals such as regulation of emotions, stress, 
identity/self-image, self-expression, mood/anxiety, relaxation, changing 
patterns and social functioning. Enlisting arts and psychomotor therapies for 
patients with a personality disorder is recommended because they value these 
therapies and perceive these to be effective. It could be considered to ask arts 
and psychomotor therapies to provide a contribution to the diagnostic process, 
to the problem analysis via observation and to determining treatment indication 
and treatment goals. More research is needed.

Copyright Â© 2022 Haeyen.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.878866
PMCID: PMC9243752
PMID: 35782411

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.