1. Dementia (London). 2023 Jan;22(1):252-280. doi: 10.1177/14713012221127359.
Epub  2022 Oct 4.

The use of technology for arts-based activities in older adults living with mild 
cognitive impairment or dementia: A scoping review.

MacRitchie J(1), Floridou GA(2), Christensen J(2), Timmers R(1), de Witte L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Music, 7315The University of Sheffield, UK; Healthy Lifespan 
Institute, 7315The University of Sheffield, UK.
(2)Department of Music, 7315The University of Sheffield, UK.
(3)Centre for Assistive Technology and Connected Healthcare (CATCH), 7315The 
University of Sheffield, UK.

For older adults living with mild cognitive impairment or dementia, creative 
arts-based activities can offer many benefits from enjoyment as 
leisure/recreation to an avenue to maintain cognitive, social and emotional 
wellbeing. With growing interest and recognition that technology could have 
potential to assist in delivering these activities in more accessible and 
personalised ways, a scoping review was undertaken to systematically examine the 
scientific literature for technology-assisted creative arts activities for older 
adults living with dementia. We searched PubMed, PsychINFO, Web of Science, 
Scopus and ACM Digital Library databases using keywords centering on population 
with dementia, an intervention using technology, and a context of creative arts, 
with no restrictions on the type of outcome measured. We retrieved 3739 records, 
with an additional 22 from hand-searching. 51 full-text articles met the 
inclusion and exclusion criteria. Findings of the review indicate technologies 
principally being designed for music activities (listening, and music-making), 
as well as storytelling and visual arts. The majority of devices were 
custom-made, with studies mainly reporting on validating the success of the 
device/intervention. This suggests most work in the field is currently at 
prototyping stage, although a few devices are now commercially available. 
Recommendations for future research includes involvement of participants 
reporting on their previous experiences in the arts and how this influences 
co-design choices, and inclusion of different severities of dementia in the 
participant/co-design group. Furthering device development past prototyping 
stage as well as collaboration between teams would enable comparisons to be made 
across different types of devices used for the same activity, and comparisons 
across arts-based activities that could lead to cross-disciplinary outcomes for 
the design of creative arts-based assistive technologies.

DOI: 10.1177/14713012221127359
PMCID: PMC9772900
PMID: 36194002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.