1. Front Psychol. 2022 Apr 13;13:822264. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.822264. 
eCollection 2022.

The CODA Model: A Review and Skeptical Extension of the Constructionist Model of 
Emotional Episodes Induced by Music.

Lennie TM(1), Eerola T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Music, Durham University, Durham, United Kingdom.

This paper discusses contemporary advancements in the affective sciences 
(described together as skeptical theories) that can inform the music-emotion 
literature. Key concepts in these theories are outlined, highlighting their 
points of agreement and disagreement. This summary shows the importance of 
appraisal within the emotion process, provides a greater emphasis upon 
goal-directed accounts of (emotion) behavior, and a need to move away from 
discrete emotion "folk" concepts and toward the study of an emotional episode 
and its components. Consequently, three contemporary music emotion theories 
(BRECVEMA, Multifactorial Process Approach, and a Constructionist Account) are 
examined through a skeptical lens. This critique highlights the over-reliance 
upon categorization and a lack of acknowledgment of appraisal processes, 
specifically goal-directed appraisal, in examining how individual experiences of 
music emerge in different contexts. Based on this critique of current 
music-emotion models, we present our skeptically informed CODA model - 
Constructivistly-Organised Dimensional-Appraisal model. This model addresses 
skeptical limitations of existing theories, reinstates the role of goal-directed 
appraisal as central to what makes music relevant and meaningful to an 
individual in different contexts and brings together different theoretical 
frameworks into a single model. From the development of the CODA model, several 
hypotheses are proposed and applied to musical contexts. These hypotheses 
address theoretical issues such as acknowledging individual and contextual 
differences in emotional intensity and valence, as well as differentiating 
between induced and perceived emotions, and utilitarian and aesthetic emotions. 
We conclude with a sections of recommendations for future research. Altogether, 
this theoretical critique and proposed model points toward a positive future 
direction for music-emotion science. One where researchers can take forward 
testable predictions about what makes music relevant and meaningful to an 
individual.

Copyright Â© 2022 Lennie and Eerola.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.822264
PMCID: PMC9043863
PMID: 35496245

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.