1. PLoS One. 2023 Dec 27;18(12):e0296287. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0296287. 
eCollection 2023.

Effects of music therapy on degree of cooperation with anesthesia induction and 
preoperative anxiety in children with simple congenital heart disease: A 
protocol of systematic review and meta-analysis.

Liu H(1), Song X(2), Xiong L(3), Zhang L(4), Luo B(1), Liu S(5).

Author information:
(1)Postgraduate Department, Capital University of Physical Education and Sports, 
Haidian, Beijing, China.
(2)Postgraduate Department, Beijing Sport University, Haidian, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Public Sports, Jiangxi Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China.
(4)Taiyuan Tong Shan Rehabilitation Hospital, Taiyuan, Shanxi, China.
(5)School of Sport and Art, Shenzhen Technology University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 
province, China.

BACKGROUND: Anxiety is a common preoperative symptom in children with simple 
congenital heart disease (SCHD). Music therapy shows potential as a non-drug 
intervention. However, it is unclear how it impacts the level of cooperation 
during the induction of anesthesia and preoperative anxiety, as well as the 
factors that influence its effectiveness. Therefore, we will conduct a 
comprehensive review and meta-analysis to assess the impact of music therapy on 
the level of cooperation during anesthesia induction and preoperative anxiety in 
children with SCHD.
METHODS: Electronic searches will be conducted through various databases 
including PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, Medline, and CNKI to gather randomized 
controlled trials (RCTs) examining the impact of music therapy on the level of 
cooperation during anesthesia induction and preoperative anxiety among children 
with SCHD. Two evaluators will independently review the literature, extract 
information, and assess the risk of bias in the included studies. Afterwards, 
data analysis will be conducted using Stata 14.0 software and Revman 5.4 
software. The results will be based on random-effects models. The reliability 
and quality of evidence will be evaluated by using the Grading of 
Recommendations, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) system. Heterogeneity will 
be examined by subgroup analysis stratified by age, gender ratio, type of 
surgery, drop-out rate, measurement tools, and country of origin. We will assess 
potential publication bias using funnel plot symmetrical and Begg's ang Egger's 
regression tests.
DISCUSSION: Given the multiple advantages that may be associated with music 
therapy, this therapy may be a desirable alternative to existing therapies for 
preoperative cooperation and anxiety issues in children with SCHD. We hope that 
this systematic review will guide clinical decision-making for future efforts 
related to coping with preoperative fit and anxiety in children with SCHD.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: PROSPERO registration number: CRD42023445313. 
https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/display_record.php?ID=CRD42023445313.

Copyright: Â© 2023 Liu et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0296287
PMCID: PMC10752520
PMID: 38150450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.