1. Front Psychol. 2023 Jan 30;14:1076552. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1076552. 
eCollection 2023.

The effect of teacher support on Chinese university students' sustainable online 
learning engagement and online academic persistence in the post-epidemic era.

Ma X(1)(2), Jiang M(1), Nong L(3).

Author information:
(1)Chinese International College, Dhurakij Pundit University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Department of Basic Science, Guizhou Aerospace Vocational and Technical 
College, Zunyi, China.
(3)School of Education and Music, Hezhou University, Hezhou, China.

Since entering the post-epidemic era of COVID-19 at the end of 2021, schools 
have mostly adopted a combined online and offline teaching mode to effectively 
respond to the normalized epidemic, which has changed the traditional learning 
mode of students. Based on the study demand-resources (SD-R) model theory, this 
study developed a research model and proposed six research hypotheses to explore 
the relationship between Chinese university students' perceived teacher support 
(PTS), online academic self-efficacy (OAS-E), online academic emotions (OAE), 
sustainable online learning engagement (SOLE), and online academic persistence 
(OAP) in the post-epidemic era. In this study, 593 Chinese university students 
were invited to respond to a questionnaire survey using the convenience sampling 
method. The results of the study showed that: PTS had a positive effect on OAS-E 
and OAE; OAS-E had a positive effect on OAE; OAS-E and OAE had a positive effect 
on the students' SOLE; and SOLE had a positive effect on their OAP. Based on the 
analysis, it is recommended that teachers provide more support and resources to 
further enhance students' academic self-efficacy and academic emotions, and thus 
ensure students' SOLE and OAP.

Copyright Â© 2023 Ma, Jiang and Nong.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1076552
PMCID: PMC9922889
PMID: 36794084

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.