1. Psychol Sport Exerc. 2025 Jan;76:102717. doi:
10.1016/j.psychsport.2024.102717.  Epub 2024 Aug 6.

One-HIIT wonder: Can music make high-intensity interval training more pleasant?

Karageorghis CI(1), Guérin SMR(2), Fessler L(3), Howard LW(4), Pinto C(4), Ojuri 
O(4), Kuan J(4), Samwell-Nash KG(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Brunel University London, Middlesex, United 
Kingdom. Electronic address: costas.karageorghis@brunel.ac.uk.
(2)Institute of Neuroscience, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, 
Belgium.
(3)Univ. Grenoble-Alpes, SENS, F-38000 Grenoble, France.
(4)Department of Life Sciences, Brunel University London, Middlesex, United 
Kingdom.

The use of music as an aid to recovery during and after exercise is an area of 
growing scientific interest. We investigated the effects of in-task, 
asynchronous music and respite-active music (i.e., music used for active 
recovery in between high-intensity exercise bouts) on a range of psychological, 
psychophysical and psychophysiological outcomes. Participants (N = 28; 14 
females) made five laboratory visits for: (a) pre-test/familiarisation; (b) 
fast-tempo music during supramaximal exercise bouts and medium-tempo music 
during active-recovery periods; (c) fast-tempo music during exercise and no 
music during recovery; (d) no music during exercise and medium-tempo music 
during recovery; and (e) a no-music (throughout) control. A cycle 
ergometer-based HIIT protocol comprising 6 × 60-s bouts at 100% Wmax with 75-s 
active recovery was administered. Measures were taken at the end of supramaximal 
bouts and active recovery periods (RPE, state attention, core affect, state 
motivation), then upon cessation of the protocol (remembered pleasure and 
exercise enjoyment). Heart rate and heart rate variability (HRV) measures were 
taken throughout. The music manipulations only had an effect on state 
motivation, which was higher (p = 0.036) in the fast tempo-medium tempo 
condition compared to no-music control (Cohen's d = 0.49), and the SDNN 
component of HRV, which was lower (p = 0.007) in the fast-tempo-no-music 
condition compared to control (Cohen's d = 0.32). Collectively, the present 
findings do not support any of the study hypotheses regarding the music-related 
manipulations, and do not concur with the findings of related studies (e.g., 
Karageorghis et al., 2021). The unexpected results are discussed with reference 
to extant theory, and recommendations are offered in regard to music-related 
applications.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychsport.2024.102717
PMID: 39117254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.