1. Front Neurol. 2023 Sep 1;14:1206171. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1206171. 
eCollection 2023.

Calming effect of Clinically Designed Improvisatory Music for patients admitted 
to the epilepsy monitoring unit during the COVID-19 pandemic: a pilot study.

Bonakdarpour B(1)(2), Zhou G(1), Huang D(1)(2), Vidano CT(2), Schuele S(1), 
Zelano C(1), Takarabe C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, IL, United States.
(2)Feinberg School of Medicine, Mesulam Center for Cognitive Neurology and 
Alzheimer's Disease, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, United States.

BACKGROUND: Epilepsy monitoring requires simulating seizure-inducing conditions 
which frequently causes discomfort to epilepsy monitoring unit (EMU) patients. 
COVID-19 hospital restrictions added another layer of stress during hospital 
admissions. The purpose of this pilot study was to provide evidence that live 
virtual Clinically Designed Improvisatory Music (CDIM) brings relief to EMU 
patients for their psychological distress.
METHODS: Five persons with epilepsy (PWEs) in the EMU during the COVID-19 
lockdown participated in the study (average age ± SD = 30.2 ± 6 years). 
Continuous electroencephalogram (EEG) and electrocardiogram (EKG) were obtained 
before, during, and after live virtual CDIM. CDIM consisted of 40 minutes of 
calming music played by a certified clinical music practitioner (CMP) on viola. 
Post-intervention surveys assessed patients' emotional state on a 1-10 Likert 
scale. Alpha/beta power spectral density ratio was calculated for each subject 
across the brain and was evaluated using one-way repeated analysis of variance, 
comparing 20 minutes before, during, and 20 minutes after CDIM. Post-hoc 
analysis was performed using paired t-test at the whole brain level and regions 
with peak changes.
RESULTS: Patients reported enhanced emotional state (9 ± 1.26), decrease in 
tension (9.6 ± 0.49), decreased restlessness (8.6 ± 0.80), increased pleasure 
(9.2 ± 0.98), and likelihood to recommend (10 ± 0) on a 10-point Likert scale. 
Based on one-way repeated analysis of variance, alpha/beta ratio increased at 
whole-brain analysis (F3,12 = 5.01, P = 0.018) with a peak in midline (F3,12 
= 6.63, P = 0.0068 for Cz) and anterior medial frontal region (F3,12 = 6.45, P 
= 0.0076 for Fz) during CDIM and showed a trend to remain increased 
post-intervention.
CONCLUSION: In this pilot study, we found positive effects of CDIM as reported 
by patients, and an increased alpha/beta ratio with meaningful 
electroencephalographic correlates due to the calming effects in response to 
CDIM. Our study provides proof of concept that live virtual CDIM offered 
demonstrable comfort with biologic correlations for patients admitted in the EMU 
during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Copyright © 2023 Bonakdarpour, Zhou, Huang, Vidano, Schuele, Zelano and 
Takarabe.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1206171
PMCID: PMC10507627
PMID: 37731858

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.