1. Occup Ther Int. 2022 Jun 18;2022:6841445. doi: 10.1155/2022/6841445.
eCollection  2022.

Design of Semantic Matching Model of Folk Music in Occupational Therapy Based on 
Audio Emotion Analysis.

Ouyang W(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Music Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an Shaanxi 710119, China.

The main semantic symbol systems for people to express their emotions include 
natural language and music. The analysis and establishment of semantic 
association between language and music is helpful to provide more accurate 
retrieval and recommendation services for text and music. Existing researches 
mainly focus on the surface symbolic features and association of natural 
language and music, which limits the performance and interpretability of 
applications based on semantic association of natural language and music. 
Emotion is the main meaning of music expression, and the semantic range of text 
expression includes emotion. In this paper, the semantic features of music are 
extracted from audio features, and the semantic matching model of audio emotion 
analysis is constructed to analyze ethnic music audio emotion through feature 
extraction ability of deep structure. The model is based on the framework of 
emotional semantic matching technology and realizes the emotional semantic 
matching of music fragments and words through semantic emotional recognition 
algorithm. Multiple experiments show that when W = 0.65, the recognition rate of 
multichannel fusion model is 88.42%, and the model can reasonably realize audio 
emotion analysis. When the spatial dimension of music data changes, the 
classification accuracy reaches the highest when the spatial dimension is 25. 
Analysing the semantic association of audio promotes the application of folk 
music in occupational therapy.

Copyright Â© 2022 Wensi Ouyang.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/6841445
PMCID: PMC9233611
PMID: 35821710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the 
work reported in this paper.