1. Child Adolesc Social Work J. 2022 Nov 16:1-30. doi:
10.1007/s10560-022-00893-x.  Online ahead of print.

A Systematic Review of Music-Based Interventions to Improve Treatment Engagement 
and Mental Health Outcomes for Adolescents and Young Adults.

Rodwin AH(1), Shimizu R(2), Travis R Jr(3), James KJ(1), Banya M(1), Munson 
MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Silver School of Social Work, New York University, New York, NY USA.
(2)School of Social Work, University of Alaska, Anchorage, AK USA.
(3)School of Social Work, Texas State University, San Marcos, TX USA.

Mental health disorders and suicidality are rising among adolescents and young 
adults (A-YA) while rates of treatment engagement remain notoriously low. 
Emerging research supports the potential of music-based interventions to improve 
mental health, but their efficacy remains unclear for A-YA. This systematic 
review evaluates the evidence on music-based psychosocial interventions to 
improve engagement in treatment and/or mental health outcomes among A-YA. This 
review was prospectively registered with PROSPERO and followed the Preferred 
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. 
Twenty-six studies were extracted. There was heterogeneity of designs, 
populations, measures, and outcomes. A typology of music-based interventions 
emerged, which is characterized by combinations of three broad categories: 1) 
Somatosensory, 2) Social-Emotional, and 3) Cognitive-Reflective. Most 
interventions are Socio-Cognitive and Holistically Integrated (combines all 
three) followed by Socio-Somatic. All interventions involved Social-Emotional 
processes. Results indicate that most studies report significant effects for 
mental health outcomes related to social and emotional improvements and 
reductions of internalizing symptoms for adolescents. Few studies targeted young 
adults and effects on engagement were rarely measured. There is a need for more 
studies that use rigorous methods. This review illuminated a need for 
interventions that are developmentally and culturally tailored to subgroups. 
Finally, the field is ripe from more studies that apply experimental 
therapeutics to conceptualize, operationalize, and test mechanisms of change to 
improve the understanding of how and for whom music-based interventions work. 
Recommendations for embedding these innovative strategies into research and 
practice for A-YA are discussed.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The online version contains supplementary material 
available at 10.1007/s10560-022-00893-x.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, 
LLC, part of Springer Nature 2022, Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a 
society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a 
publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author 
self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely 
governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.

DOI: 10.1007/s10560-022-00893-x
PMCID: PMC9666939
PMID: 36407676

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors have no 
conflicts of interest to disclose.