1. J Integr Complement Med. 2023 May;29(5):279-291. doi: 10.1089/jicm.2022.0623. 
Epub 2022 Nov 10.

Barriers to Implementation of Music Listening Interventions for Cancer-Related 
Phenomena: A Mapping Review.

Kiernan JM(1), DeCamp K(1), Sender J(1), Given C(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Nursing, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.

Introduction: Despite music listening interventions (MLIs) being recommended in 
multiple clinical practice guidelines, implementation into oncology clinical 
practice sites has been slow. This mapping review aimed to critique and identify 
barriers to MLI clinical implementation, as well as offer practical solutions 
for both clinicians and researchers. Methods: A PRISMA-based mapping review of 
MLI literature was performed using CINAHL, PubMed, PsycINFO, and Web of Science 
databases. Eligibility criteria included studies with MLIs as independent 
variables and cancer-related phenomena as outcome variables. Search was 
performed in October 2021, and no date limit was set. Results: Thirty-eight 
studies met the eligibility criteria for inclusion. Several aspects of MLI 
studies suggested potential barrier status to clinician or patient adoption. 
These findings included choice of music, music delivery hardware, dose of MLI, 
and timing of MLI specific to outcomes of interest (e.g., pain, anxiety, mood). 
Few investigators addressed the concurrent effects of pharmaceuticals (e.g., 
analgesics, anxiolytics), and controlling for the effects of competing auditory 
stimuli was minimal. Discussion: This review has identified several barriers 
that may obstruct clinician and patient adoption of MLIs, despite level of 
evidence for MLIs that presently exists in the literature. The review makes 
practical suggestions for clinicians, researchers, and patients to overcome the 
present barriers and ease MLIs into common practice in clinics and homes.

DOI: 10.1089/jicm.2022.0623
PMID: 36355075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]