1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2022 Aug 2;19(15):9446. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph19159446.

The "Ensemble"-A Group Music Therapy Treatment for Developing Preschool 
Children's Social Skills.

Blanky-Voronov R(1), Gilboa A(1).

Author information:
(1)Music Department, Bar-Ilan Univerisity, Ramat Gan 5290002, Israel.

(1) Background: Several music therapy treatments have been developed to assist 
children with social skill deficiencies. They lack reference to emotions and 
their connection to social skills and they don't deal with group dynamics and 
its impact on the group. We conducted a preliminary examination of the 
"Ensemble" treatment, which was developed to improve the social skills of 
children of various client populations, with the social deficiency originating 
from different sources; (2) Methods: 24 children in four groups went through the 
year-long "Ensemble" treatment. Observations of the sessions were analyzed 
quantitatively counting the occurrence of twelve typical socially oriented 
behaviors. Qualitative interviews were conducted with 24 mothers and 23 
kindergarten teachers (KTs) before and after the process; (3) Results: 
Quantitative results show that children in all four "Ensemble" groups, improved 
in nine out of twelve social skills. Qualitative results show that the 
improvement was evident also in the home environment (as reported by mothers) 
and in the kindergarten environment (as reported by KTs); (4) Conclusions: A 
comparison between the "Ensemble" and previous music therapy treatments 
indicates this treatment's potential to help children with a wide variety of 
social skill deficiencies. Further investigation based on more rigorous research 
designs is recommended.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph19159446
PMCID: PMC9368133
PMID: 35954803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.