1. J Intell Robot Syst. 2022;105(2):28. doi: 10.1007/s10846-022-01604-5. Epub
2022  May 17.

Comparing Social Robot Embodiment for Child Musical Education.

de Souza Jeronimo B(1), de Albuquerque Wheler AP(1), de Oliveira JPG(2), Melo 
R(3), Bastos-Filho CJA(2), Kelner J(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Informática, UFPE: Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, Recife, 
Pernambuco Brazil.
(2)Engenharia da Computação, UPE: Universidade de Pernambuco, Recife, Pernambuco 
Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Eletrônica e Sistemas, UFPE: Universidade Federal de 
Pernambuco, Recife, Pernambuco Brazil.

The present research focuses in the comparison of two social robot models 
running the same Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) applications targeting the 
context of music education for children aged 9-11, with the objective of 
underlying the design choices favored by the target audience on the running 
tasks. The Guitar Tuner consists of two main functionalities: tuning process and 
performance evaluation, which we implemented using the NAO and Zenbo robots. 
User evaluation included 20 children and assessed their perceived robot 
embodiment preferences (e.g., shape, robot motion, displays, and emotional 
expressivity) and perceived usability aspects. The evaluation used an 
experimental remote protocol supporting collecting online feedback with users 
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Empirical results supported performing 
quantitative and qualitative evaluations of the HRI application and highlighting 
the perceived differences of robot embodiment features. The discussions center 
on improving a future version of the HRI application, plus children's 
considerations about their preferred robot embodiment features during the 
observation sessions. Finally, we propose recommendations for robot embodiment 
design for children and learning based on this case study and discuss protocol 
limitations during the social distancing context, that we believe as a valid 
alternative to move forward with experimental designs, particularly in robotics, 
becoming a great contribution to other researchers facing similar hurdles.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2022.

DOI: 10.1007/s10846-022-01604-5
PMCID: PMC9111945
PMID: 35600218