1. Comput Intell Neurosci. 2022 Jul 5;2022:7646000. doi: 10.1155/2022/7646000. 
eCollection 2022.

Music Individualization Recommendation System Based on Big Data Analysis.

Sun P(1).

Author information:
(1)The School of Arts, Yangtze University, Jingzhou 434023, China.

This study discovers a certain complementary relationship between different 
algorithms after conducting a comprehensive and in-depth analysis of proposal 
algorithms. This study proposes a big data music individualization proposal 
method based on big data analysis, which integrates user behaviour, behaviour 
context, user information, and music work information, based on traditional 
music proposal methods; improves the collaborative filtering proposal algorithm 
based on user behaviour; and calculates the semantic similarity between lyrics, 
as well as the song co-occurrence similarity based on the user's music download 
history. Because the lyrics represent the thoughts and feelings that the song 
wishes to convey to the listeners, the proposal module is completed, and the 
music proposal system is realized, by combining the two different similar 
information, using the improved algorithm and the Hadoop distributed framework. 
The music similarity and label similarity are combined to alleviate the problem 
of cold start and data sparseness, and a mixed similarity calculation formula is 
proposed to calculate the similarity between music. The accuracy similarity of 
the big data music proposal model proposed in this study is improved by about 
20% through experimental comparison when compared with the collaborative 
filtering model and the hybrid model. It reflects the efficiency, scalability, 
and stability of the music proposal system as well as the ability to meet users' 
individual music needs.

Copyright Â© 2022 Pengfei Sun.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/7646000
PMCID: PMC9276508
PMID: 35837215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that there are no conflicts 
of interest.