1. Cureus. 2025 Mar 16;17(3):e80642. doi: 10.7759/cureus.80642. eCollection 2025 
Mar.

Hindu Spiritual Music for Perioperative Anxiolysis and Stress Modulation: An 
Open-Label, Randomized Comparative Trial in Lower Limb Surgery Patients.

Jain A(1), Verma B(1), Saunakiya P(2), Agarwal S(3), Agarwal P(4), Gupta P(5), 
Thakur C(1).

Author information:
(1)Anesthesiology, Maharani Laxmi Bai Medical College, Jhansi, IND.
(2)Surgery, Maharani Laxmi Bai Medical College, Jhansi, IND.
(3)Orthopedics, Maharani Laxmi Bai Medical College, Jhansi, IND.
(4)Surgery, Rajkiya Medical College, Jalaun, IND.
(5)Orthopedics, Rajkiya Medical College, Jalaun, IND.

Background Perioperative anxiety is a common concern in patients undergoing 
regional anesthesia, as they remain conscious during surgery. Various 
non-pharmacological interventions, including music therapy, have been explored 
to reduce anxiety and stress response. Spiritual interventions, particularly 
religious music, have been shown to provide emotional stability and enhance 
coping mechanisms during stressful situations. Objective This study aimed to 
evaluate the impact of Hindu religious music compared to patient-selected 
instrumental music on intraoperative anxiety, stress response, and patient 
satisfaction in individuals undergoing lower limb surgery under regional 
anesthesia. Methods This prospective, open-label, randomized controlled trial 
was conducted at Maharani Laxmi Bai Medical College, a tertiary care teaching 
hospital in Jhansi, India, after obtaining approval from the Institutional 
Ethics Committee (Certificate No. 5208/IEC/I/2022-2023) and registration with 
the Clinical Trials Registry of India (CTRI/2024/01/062006, registered on 
January 30, 2024). The trial included 150 ASA class 1 or 2 patients undergoing 
elective lower limb surgery under regional anesthesia. Participants were 
randomly assigned to two groups: Group A (Hindu spiritual music) and Group B 
(patient-preferred instrumental music). Music was played intraoperatively via 
noise-canceling headphones. The primary outcomes were intraoperative anxiety 
(measured using the Visual Analog Scale for Anxiety (VAS-A)) and serum cortisol 
levels as a biochemical marker of stress. Secondary outcomes included 
hemodynamic parameters, additional analgesic requirements, incidence of nausea 
and vomiting, and patient satisfaction. Results Group A had significantly lower 
intraoperative VAS-A scores compared to Group B (2.13 ± 0.91 vs. 3.41 ± 1.12; p 
= 0.01). Serum cortisol levels were also significantly lower in Group A at the 
end of surgery (28.54 ± 6.11 vs. 32.50 ± 8.82 µg/dL; p = 0.001) and remained 
lower on the first postoperative day (p = 0.001). The incidence of postoperative 
nausea and vomiting was significantly lower in Group A (6.8% vs. 17.5%; p = 
0.028). Patient satisfaction was also higher in the Hindu spiritual music group 
(p = 0.03). Conclusion Hindu spiritual music reduced perioperative anxiety, 
attenuated the stress response, and decreased postoperative nausea and vomiting 
compared to non-spiritual instrumental music. It should be considered a 
non-pharmacological intervention in the perioperative period to alleviate 
anxiety and improve patient comfort. However, the study's findings may have 
limited generalizability to non-Hindu patients. Future research should explore 
whether similar benefits are observed in religious individuals listening to 
music of their own faith and cultural background.

Copyright © 2025, Jain et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.80642
PMCID: PMC11911900
PMID: 40099310

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent for treatment and open 
access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this study. 
Institute Ethics Committee of Maharani Laxmi Bai Medical College, Jhansi issued 
approval 5208/IEC/2022-2023. The study adhered to the principles outlined in the 
Declaration of Helsinki (2013) and Good Clinical Practice guidelines. Animal 
subjects: All authors have confirmed that this study did not involve animal 
subjects or tissue. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform 
disclosure form, all authors declare the following: Payment/services info: All 
authors have declared that no financial support was received from any 
organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: All authors have 
declared that they have no financial relationships at present or within the 
previous three years with any organizations that might have an interest in the 
submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared that there are no 
other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the 
submitted work.