1. JMIR Res Protoc. 2025 Apr 16;14:e67764. doi: 10.2196/67764.

Using Music to Promote Hong Kong Young People's Emotion Regulation and Reduce 
Their Mood Symptoms and Loneliness: Protocol for a Pilot Randomized Controlled 
Trial.

Cao Y(1), Shi Y(1), Low DCW(1), Shek DTL(2), Shum DHK(2), Tanksale R(3), Dingle 
G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Social Work and Social Administration, The University of Hong 
Kong, Pok Fu Lam, China (Hong Kong).
(2)Department of Applied Social Sciences, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 
Kowloon, China (Hong Kong).
(3)School of Psychology, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Mental health needs in the community surged during the pandemic, 
with concerning reports of increased negative mood symptoms among youth. At the 
same time, preventive psychoeducational interventions were insufficient within 
frontline youth mental health services in Hong Kong, and research specifically 
addressing youth loneliness remained limited on an international scale. Given 
the association between loneliness and other mental health symptoms, 
psychoeducational programs that empower adolescents to cope with emotions may 
help address both the research gap and local demand. As such, Tuned In, a 
previously validated intervention program originally developed in Australia, was 
introduced to the local context. Cultural adaptations and an added focus on 
loneliness were incorporated into the project to enhance its acceptability and 
test its effectiveness.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to evaluate an adapted version of the Tuned In 
music-based psychoeducation program, designed to reduce loneliness, depression, 
and anxiety symptoms among young people in Hong Kong by enhancing their emotion 
regulation skills.
METHODS: Participants aged 16-19 years will be randomly assigned to either the 
experimental or control group. The experimental group will receive an online, 
group-based psychoeducation program focused on emotion recognition and 
management, delivered weekly over 4 consecutive weeks. The intervention is 
grounded in Russell's emotion circumplex model and music psychology, and program 
content included: The 2D model and characteristics of emotions from different 
quadrants (session 1); happiness and loneliness (session 2); high-arousal and 
negative-valence emotions, for example, stress and anxiety (sessions 3); and 
anxiety, perfectionism, and a celebration of achievement (session 4). Both 
therapist- and participant-selected music will be used in the intervention to 
provide a rich repertoire for group discussion, psychoeducation, reflection, and 
the practice of social skills. The main outcome measures will be assessed using 
the Emotion Regulation Questionnaire, the Difficulties in Emotion Regulation 
Scale, the Depression Anxiety Stress Scale, and the De Jong Gierveld Loneliness 
Scale. Feedback on the project arrangement will be gathered through qualitative 
input. A mixed methods analysis will be conducted following data collection.
RESULTS: The project was successfully funded in February 2023 by the Health and 
Medical Research Fund in Hong Kong and commenced in August 2023. As of September 
16, 2024, a total of 316 completed questionnaires had been received through 
Qualtrics for screening purposes, with 89 participants deemed eligible for the 
program. The project is scheduled to conclude in August 2025, with results to be 
published thereafter.
CONCLUSIONS: Participants are expected to show improvements in emotion 
regulation, along with reductions in mood symptoms and loneliness, following the 
intervention.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT06147297; 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT06147297.
INTERNATIONAL REGISTERED REPORT IDENTIFIER (IRRID): DERR1-10.2196/67764.

Â©Yuan Cao, Yuanxin Shi, Debbie Chi Wing Low, Daniel T L Shek, David H K Shum, 
Radhika Tanksale, Genevieve Dingle. Originally published in JMIR Research 
Protocols (https://www.researchprotocols.org), 16.04.2025.

DOI: 10.2196/67764
PMID: 40239199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]