1. Multimed Tools Appl. 2023 Mar 22:1-13. doi: 10.1007/s11042-023-15008-6. Online
 ahead of print.

Analysis of facial emotion expression in eating occasions using deep learning.

Yildirim E(1), Akbulut FP(1), Catal C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Engineering, Istanbul Kültür University, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(2)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Qatar University, Doha, 
Qatar.

Eating is experienced as an emotional social activity in any culture. There are 
factors that influence the emotions felt during food consumption. The emotion 
felt while eating has a significant impact on our lives and affects different 
health conditions such as obesity. In addition, investigating the emotion during 
food consumption is considered a multidisciplinary problem ranging from 
neuroscience to anatomy. In this study, we focus on evaluating the emotional 
experience of different participants during eating activities and aim to analyze 
them automatically using deep learning models. We propose a facial 
expression-based prediction model to eliminate user bias in questionnaire-based 
assessment systems and to minimize false entries to the system. We measured the 
neural, behavioral, and physical manifestations of emotions with a mobile app 
and recognize emotional experiences from facial expressions. In this research, 
we used three different situations to test whether there could be any factor 
other than the food that could affect a person's mood. We asked users to watch 
videos, listen to music or do nothing while eating. This way we found out that 
not only food but also external factors play a role in emotional change. We 
employed three Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architectures, fine-tuned 
VGG16, and Deepface to recognize emotional responses during eating. The 
experimental results demonstrated that the fine-tuned VGG16 provides remarkable 
results with an overall accuracy of 77.68% for recognizing the four emotions. 
This system is an alternative to today's survey-based restaurant and food 
evaluation systems.

© The Author(s) 2023.

DOI: 10.1007/s11042-023-15008-6
PMCID: PMC10031178
PMID: 37362640