1. Eur J Investig Health Psychol Educ. 2025 Mar 10;15(3):33. doi: 
10.3390/ejihpe15030033.

Enhancing Emotional Intelligence in Autism Spectrum Disorder Through 
Intervention: A Systematic Review.

García-García L(1), Martí-Vilar M(1), Hidalgo-Fuentes S(1), Cabedo-Peris J(2).

Author information:
(1)Basic Psychology Department, Faculty of Psychology and Speech Therapy, 
Universitat de València, 46010 Valencia, Spain.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, Universidad Internacional de Valencia (VIU), 
46002 Valencia, Spain.

Limitations in some emotional characteristics that are conceptualized in the 
definition of emotional intelligence can be seen among people with autism 
spectrum disorder. The main objective of this study is the analysis of the 
effectiveness of interventions directed to enhance emotional recognition and 
emotional regulation among this specific population. A systematic review was 
carried out in databases such as Psycinfo, WoS, SCOPUS, and PubMed, identifying 
a total of 572 articles, of which 29 met the inclusion criteria. The total 
sample included 1061 participants, mainly children aged between 4 and 13 years. 
The analyzed interventions focused on improving emotional recognition, with 
significant results in the identification of emotions such as happiness, 
sadness, and anger, although some showed limitations in the duration of these 
effects. The most used programs included training in facial recognition, virtual 
reality, and the use of new technologies such as robots. These showed 
improvements in both emotional recognition and social skills. Other types of 
interventions such as music therapy or the use of drama techniques were also 
implemented. However, a gender bias and lack of consistency between results from 
different cultures were observed. The conclusions indicate that, although the 
interventions reviewed seem effective, more research is needed to maximize their 
impact on the ASD population.

DOI: 10.3390/ejihpe15030033
PMCID: PMC11941702
PMID: 40136772

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.