1. Sensors (Basel). 2022 Dec 29;23(1):382. doi: 10.3390/s23010382.

MERP: A Music Dataset with Emotion Ratings and Raters' Profile Information.

Koh EY(1), Cheuk KW(1), Heung KY(1), Agres KR(2)(3), Herremans D(1).

Author information:
(1)Information Systems Technology and Design Pillar, Singapore University of 
Technology and Design, Singapore 487372, Singapore.
(2)Yong Siew Toh Conservatory of Music, National University Singapore, Singapore 
117376, Singapore.
(3)Centre for Music and Health, National University Singapore, Singapore 117376, 
Singapore.

Music is capable of conveying many emotions. The level and type of emotion of 
the music perceived by a listener, however, is highly subjective. In this study, 
we present the Music Emotion Recognition with Profile information dataset 
(MERP). This database was collected through Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) and 
features dynamical valence and arousal ratings of 54 selected full-length songs. 
The dataset contains music features, as well as user profile information of the 
annotators. The songs were selected from the Free Music Archive using an 
innovative method (a Triple Neural Network with the OpenSmile toolkit) to 
identify 50 songs with the most distinctive emotions. Specifically, the songs 
were chosen to fully cover the four quadrants of the valence-arousal space. Four 
additional songs were selected from the DEAM dataset to act as a benchmark in 
this study and filter out low quality ratings. A total of 452 participants 
participated in annotating the dataset, with 277 participants remaining after 
thoroughly cleaning the dataset. Their demographic information, listening 
preferences, and musical background were recorded. We offer an extensive 
analysis of the resulting dataset, together with a baseline emotion prediction 
model based on a fully connected model and an LSTM model, for our newly proposed 
MERP dataset.

DOI: 10.3390/s23010382
PMCID: PMC9824842
PMID: 36616980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.