1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2025 Mar 25:13872877241294090. doi:
10.1177/13872877241294090.  Online ahead of print.

Life-long music and dance relationships and therapeutic impressions in 
individuals with and without mild cognitive impairment to inform the design of 
music- and dance-based therapies.

Kazanski ME(1), Dharanendra S(2), Rosenberg MC(3), Chen D(4), Brown ER(5), 
Emmery L(6), McKay JL(7)(8), Kesar TM(9), Hackney ME(1)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Geriatrics & Gerontology, Emory 
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 
USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Emory University & Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(4)Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(5)College of Arts and Sciences, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(6)Department of Music, Emory University College of Arts and Sciences, Atlanta, 
GA, USA.
(7)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Emory University School of Medicine, 
Atlanta, GA, USA.
(8)Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA.
(9)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, 
Atlanta, GA, USA.
(10)Atlanta VA Center for Visual & Neurocognitive Rehabilitation, Atlanta, GA, 
USA.
(11)Birmingham/Atlanta VA Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, 
Atlanta, GA, USA.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2024 May 14:2024.05.09.24307114. doi: 10.1101/2024.05.09.24307114.

BackgroundNo effective therapies exist to prevent neurodegenerative mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) related to Alzheimer's disease. Therapies integrating 
music and/or dance are promising non-pharmacological options to effectively 
mitigate cognitive decline.ObjectiveTo deepen our understanding of individuals' 
relationships (i.e., histories, experiences, and attitudes) with music and 
dance, in order to incorporate such knowledge into the design of music- and 
dance-based interventions, thereby improving therapeutic outcomes.MethodsEleven 
older adults with MCI and five of their care partners/ spouses (4 M/12F; Black: 
n = 4, White: n = 10, Hispanic/Latino: n = 2; Age: 71.4 ± 9.6 years) first 
completed questionnaires, then participated in focus groups that captured 
aspects of their relationships with music and dance. Emergent themes were 
extracted from four major topics, including: (1) experience and history, (2) 
enjoyment and preferences, (3) confidence and barriers, and (4) impressions of 
music and dance as therapeutic tools.ResultsThematic analysis revealed 
participants' positive impressions of music and dance as potential therapeutic 
interventions, citing perceived neuropsychological, emotional, and physical 
benefits. Participants viewed music and dance as integral to their lives, 
histories, and identities within a culture, family, and/ or community. 
Participants also identified lifelong engagement barriers that, in conjunction 
with negative feedback, instilled persistent low self-efficacy regarding dancing 
and active music engagement. Questionnaires verified individuals' 
moderately-strong music and dance relationships, which were strongest in passive 
forms of music engagement (e.g., listening).ConclusionsOur findings support that 
individuals' music and dance relationships and the associated perceptions toward 
music and dance therapy may offer valuable insights that enhance the design of 
efficacious and engaging non-pharmacological therapies for individuals with MCI.

DOI: 10.1177/13872877241294090
PMID: 40129418