1. Patterns (N Y). 2023 Aug 22;4(10):100816. doi: 10.1016/j.patter.2023.100816. 
eCollection 2023 Oct 13.

Bodily expressed emotion understanding through integrating Laban movement 
analysis.

Wu C(1), Davaasuren D(1), Shafir T(2), Tsachor R(3), Wang JZ(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Data Science and Artificial Intelligence Area, College of Information 
Sciences and Technology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 
16802, USA.
(2)The Emili Sagol Creative Arts Therapies Research Center, University of Haifa, 
Haifa 3498838, Israel.
(3)School of Theatre and Music, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.
(4)Human-Computer Interaction Area, College of Information Sciences and 
Technology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

Bodily expressed emotion understanding (BEEU) aims to automatically recognize 
human emotional expressions from body movements. Psychological research has 
demonstrated that people often move using specific motor elements to convey 
emotions. This work takes three steps to integrate human motor elements to study 
BEEU. First, we introduce BoME (body motor elements), a highly precise dataset 
for human motor elements. Second, we apply baseline models to estimate these 
elements on BoME, showing that deep learning methods are capable of learning 
effective representations of human movement. Finally, we propose a dual-source 
solution to enhance the BEEU model with the BoME dataset, which trains with both 
motor element and emotion labels and simultaneously produces predictions for 
both. Through experiments on the BoLD in-the-wild emotion understanding 
benchmark, we showcase the significant benefit of our approach. These results 
may inspire further research utilizing human motor elements for emotion 
understanding and mental health analysis.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.patter.2023.100816
PMCID: PMC10591137
PMID: 37876902

Conflict of interest statement: J.Z.W. is a named inventor on US patent 
11,636,368, “Probabilistic multigraph modeling for improving the quality of 
crowdsourced affective data,” and is a named inventor on the US patent 
application titled “Systems and methods for automated recognition of bodily 
expression of emotion.” J.Z.W. and C.W. are named inventors on the US 
provisional patent application titled “Systems and methods for learning emotion 
representations from verbal and nonverbal communication.” They are all assigned 
to The Penn State Research Foundation. These interests do not influence the 
integrity of the research, and all efforts have been made to ensure that the 
research was conducted and presented in an unbiased manner.