1. Entropy (Basel). 2025 Mar 18;27(3):317. doi: 10.3390/e27030317.

Framework for Groove Rating in Exercise-Enhancing Music Based on a CNN-TCN 
Architecture with Integrated Entropy Regularization and Pooling.

Chen J(1)(2), Han J(2), Su P(2), Zhou G(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Sports and Health Sciences, Xi'an Physical Education University, 
Xi'an 710068, China.
(2)School of P. E and Sports, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China.

Groove, a complex aspect of music perception, plays a crucial role in eliciting 
emotional and physical responses from listeners. However, accurately quantifying 
and predicting groove remains challenging due to its intricate acoustic 
features. To address this, we propose a novel framework for groove rating that 
integrates Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) with Temporal Convolutional 
Networks (TCNs), enhanced by entropy regularization and entropy-pooling 
techniques. Our approach processes audio files into Mel-spectrograms, which are 
analyzed by a CNN for feature extraction and by a TCN to capture long-range 
temporal dependencies, enabling precise groove-level prediction. Experimental 
results show that our CNN-TCN framework significantly outperforms benchmark 
methods in predictive accuracy. The integration of entropy pooling and 
regularization is critical, with their omission leading to notable reductions in 
R2 values. Our method also surpasses the performance of CNN and other 
machine-learning models, including long short-term memory (LSTM) networks and 
support vector machine (SVM) variants. This study establishes a strong 
foundation for the automated assessment of musical groove, with potential 
applications in music education, therapy, and composition. Future research will 
focus on expanding the dataset, enhancing model generalization, and exploring 
additional machine-learning techniques to further elucidate the factors 
influencing groove perception.

DOI: 10.3390/e27030317
PMCID: PMC11941122
PMID: 40149241

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.