1. Front Neurosci. 2022 Oct 6;16:1024316. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.1024316. 
eCollection 2022.

Cognitive psychology-based artificial intelligence review.

Zhao J(1), Wu M(1), Zhou L(1), Wang X(1), Jia J(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Information Science and Technology, Northwest University, Xi'an, 
China.
(2)Medical Big Data Research Center, Northwest University, Xi'an, China.
(3)School of Mathematics, Northwest University, Xi'an, China.

Most of the current development of artificial intelligence is based on brain 
cognition, however, this replication of biology cannot simulate the subjective 
emotional and mental state changes of human beings. Due to the imperfections of 
existing artificial intelligence, this manuscript summarizes and clarifies that 
artificial intelligence system combined with cognitive psychology is the 
research direction of artificial intelligence. It aims to promote the 
development of artificial intelligence and give computers human advanced 
cognitive abilities, so that computers can recognize emotions, understand human 
feelings, and eventually achieve dialog and empathy with humans and other 
artificial intelligence. This paper emphasizes the development potential and 
importance of artificial intelligence to understand, possess and discriminate 
human mental states, and argues its application value with three typical 
application examples of human-computer interaction: face attraction, affective 
computing, and music emotion, which is conducive to the further and higher level 
of artificial intelligence research.

Copyright Â© 2022 Zhao, Wu, Zhou, Wang and Jia.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2022.1024316
PMCID: PMC9582153
PMID: 36278021

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.