1. Front Hum Neurosci. 2024 Mar 28;18:1324897. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2024.1324897. 
eCollection 2024.

Music emotion recognition based on temporal convolutional attention network 
using EEG.

Qiao Y(1)(2)(3), Mu J(1)(2)(3), Xie J(1)(2)(3), Hu B(1)(2)(3), Liu G(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Southwest University, 
Chongqing, China.
(2)Institute of Affective Computing and Information Processing, Southwest 
University, Chongqing, China.
(3)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Nonlinear Circuits and Intelligent Information 
Processing, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.

Music is one of the primary ways to evoke human emotions. However, the feeling 
of music is subjective, making it difficult to determine which emotions music 
triggers in a given individual. In order to correctly identify emotional 
problems caused by different types of music, we first created an 
electroencephalogram (EEG) data set stimulated by four different types of music 
(fear, happiness, calm, and sadness). Secondly, the differential entropy 
features of EEG were extracted, and then the emotion recognition model 
CNN-SA-BiLSTM was established to extract the temporal features of EEG, and the 
recognition performance of the model was improved by using the global perception 
ability of the self-attention mechanism. The effectiveness of the model was 
further verified by the ablation experiment. The classification accuracy of this 
method in the valence and arousal dimensions is 93.45% and 96.36%, respectively. 
By applying our method to a publicly available EEG dataset DEAP, we evaluated 
the generalization and reliability of our method. In addition, we further 
investigate the effects of different EEG bands and multi-band combinations on 
music emotion recognition, and the results confirm relevant neuroscience 
studies. Compared with other representative music emotion recognition works, 
this method has better classification performance, and provides a promising 
framework for the future research of emotion recognition system based on brain 
computer interface.

Copyright Â© 2024 Qiao, Mu, Xie, Hu and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2024.1324897
PMCID: PMC11010638
PMID: 38617132

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.