1. Acta Psychol (Amst). 2025 May;255:104898. doi: 10.1016/j.actpsy.2025.104898. 
Epub 2025 Mar 18.

Music therapy and its impact on anxiety and mental well-being of Chinese 
students: An experimental comparison of traditional and VR approaches.

Liu G(1), Hu J(2), Kostikova I(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Educational Studies and Innovative Pedagogy, H.S. Skovoroda 
Kharkiv National Pedagogical University, Kharkiv, Ukraine.
(2)Department of Educational Studies and Innovative Pedagogy, H.S. Skovoroda 
Kharkiv National Pedagogical University, Kharkiv, Ukraine. Electronic address: 
15651787938@163.com.
(3)Department of Theory and Practice of the English, H.S. Skovoroda Kharkiv 
National Pedagogical University, Kharkiv, Ukraine.

The incorporation of advanced technologies into music therapy can potentially 
benefit many therapeutic approaches. This study aims to examine the 
effectiveness of music therapy, conventional and VR-enhanced, in improving 
graduate students' mental well-being and reducing their anxiety level. The study 
involved 270 fourth-year undergraduate students from three universities in 
China. Using the Chinese versions of the Warwick-Edinburgh Mental Well-Being 
Scale (WEMWBS) and the Test Anxiety Scale (TAS), the study found that the 
control group experienced the worsening of mental well-being and higher anxiety 
when compared to baseline, with the mean differences of 2.62 and 2.60 points, 
respectively. The conventional music therapy group exhibited an improvement in 
mental well-being of 3.81 points, whereas their anxiety level decreased by 3.53 
points. The effects of the intervention were even more pronounced in the VR-MT 
group, with an increase in the WEMWBS score of 7.48 points and a decrease in the 
anxiety score of 6.36 points. The results provided strong evidence of 
significant differences between the three conditions (p < 0.001). This study 
provides empirical evidence that VR-enhanced music therapy is a more effective 
method for reducing anxiety and improving mental health than the conventional 
approach.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actpsy.2025.104898
PMID: 40106973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.