1. Front Digit Health. 2025 Feb 25;7:1552396. doi: 10.3389/fdgth.2025.1552396. 
eCollection 2025.

Advancing personalized digital therapeutics: integrating music therapy, 
brainwave entrainment methods, and AI-driven biofeedback.

Jiao D(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, 
London, United Kingdom.

Mental health disorders and cognitive decline are pressing global concerns, 
increasing the demand for non-pharmacological interventions targeting emotional 
dysregulation, memory deficits, and neural dysfunction. This review 
systematically examines three promising methodologies-music therapy, brainwave 
entrainment (binaural beats, isochronic tones, multisensory stimulation), and 
their integration into a unified therapeutic paradigm. Emerging evidence 
indicates that music therapy modulates affect, reduces stress, and enhances 
cognition by engaging limbic, prefrontal, and reward circuits. Brainwave 
entrainment, particularly within the gamma frequency range (30-100 Hz), 
facilitates neural oscillatory patterns linked to relaxation, concentration, and 
memory, with 40 Hz showing promise for cognitive enhancement, albeit with 
individual variability. Synchronized multisensory stimulation, combining 
auditory and visual inputs at gamma frequencies, has demonstrated potential in 
enhancing memory and supporting neural integrity, particularly in Alzheimer's 
disease. However, challenges such as patient response variability, lack of 
standardization, and scalability hinder widespread implementation. Recent 
research suggests that a synergistic application of these modalities may 
optimize therapeutic outcomes by leveraging complementary mechanisms. To 
actualize this, AI-driven biofeedback, enabling real-time physiological 
assessment and individualized adjustments-such as tailoring musical complexity, 
entrainment frequencies, and multisensory components-emerges as a promising 
solution. This adaptive model enhances treatment accessibility and consistency 
while maximizing long-term efficacy. Although in early stages, preliminary 
evidence highlights its transformative potential in reshaping 
non-pharmacological therapeutic strategies. Advancing this field requires 
interdisciplinary research, rigorous evaluation, and ethical data stewardship to 
develop innovative, patient-centered solutions for mental health and cognitive 
rehabilitation.

© 2025 Jiao.

DOI: 10.3389/fdgth.2025.1552396
PMCID: PMC11893577
PMID: 40070544

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.