1. Physiol Meas. 2011 Oct;32(10):1529-39. doi: 10.1088/0967-3334/32/10/002. Epub 
2011 Aug 18.

Comparison of blood volume pulse and skin conductance responses to mental and 
affective stimuli at different anatomical sites.

Kushki A(1), Fairley J, Merja S, King G, Chau T.

Author information:
(1)Bloorview Research Institute, Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Measurements of blood volume pulse (BVP) and skin conductance are commonly used 
as indications of psychological arousal in affective computing and human-machine 
interfaces. To date, palmar surfaces remain the primary site for these 
measurements. Placement of sensors on palmar surfaces, however, is undesirable 
when recordings are fraught with motion and pressure artifacts. These artifacts 
are frequent when the human participant has involuntary movements as in 
hyperkinetic cerebral palsy. This motivates the use of alternative measurement 
sites. The present study examined the correlation between measurements of blood 
volume pulse and skin conductance obtained from three different sites on the 
body (fingers, toes and ear for BVP; fingers, toes and arch of the foot for skin 
conductance) in response to cognitive and affective stimuli. The results of this 
pilot study indicated significant inter-site correlation among signal features 
derived from different sites, with the exception of BVP amplitude, the number of 
electrodermal reactions and the slope of the electrodermal activity response. We 
attribute these differences in part to inter-site discrepancies in local skin 
conditions, such as skin temperature. Despite these differences, significant 
changes from baseline were present in the responses to the cognitive and 
affective stimuli at non-palmar sites, suggesting that these sites may provide 
viable signal measurements for use in affective computing and human-machine 
interface applications.

DOI: 10.1088/0967-3334/32/10/002
PMCID: PMC5028198
PMID: 21849720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]