1. Acta Psychol (Amst). 2025 Apr;254:104820. doi: 10.1016/j.actpsy.2025.104820. 
Epub 2025 Mar 8.

Music therapy in psychological and educational context: Enhancing emotional and 
cognitive development of students.

Guo Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Music Art, Lviv National Music Academy named after Mykola Lysenko, Lviv, 
Ukraine. Electronic address: yingdongguo@onmail.com.

In recent years, music therapy has gained popularity, sparking interest in 
examining its effectiveness. The primary objective of this article is to analyze 
the effectiveness of an intervention program of music therapy on the emotional 
and cognitive development of young individuals. The study design is the 
intervention-control study. The participants consisted of 140 students from a 
university in Ukraine: 70 individuals diagnosed with clinical depression and 70 
individuals who did not report any psychological disorders. The instruments 
utilized included the Psychological General Well-Being Index, Wechsler Memory 
Scale, and Conners' Continuous Performance Test-Second Edition. The results 
indicated that music therapy led to a significant improvement in the measured 
parameters across both contexts, albeit with varying degrees of effectiveness. 
In the educational context, psychological well-being increased by 10.40 points 
(p = 0.000), memory by 1.89 points (p = 0.005), and attention by 1.69 points 
(p = 0.000). In the psychological context, the effects were more pronounced: 
psychological well-being increased by 11.92 points, memory by 3.31 points, and 
attention by 1.57 points (all p = 0.000). Furthermore, effect size analysis 
revealed that music therapy exerted a very large impact in the psychological 
context on psychological well-being (d = 3.71), memory (d = 2.67), and attention 
(d = 1.17), whereas in the educational context, the effects were significant but 
comparatively lower (d = 4.36, 0.90, and 0.67, respectively). These findings 
highlight the differential impact of music therapy depending on the context of 
its implementation, emphasizing the necessity of context-specific approaches to 
maximize its benefits. This study contributes to the growing body of research 
demonstrating the effectiveness of music therapy in both psychological treatment 
and educational enhancement, supporting its broader integration into mental 
health and academic settings.

Copyright © 2025 The Author. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actpsy.2025.104820
PMID: 40058124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.