1. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2024 Mar 19;24(1):79. doi:
10.1186/s12911-024-02478-3.

Development of a new computer simulated environment to screen cognition: 
assessing the feasibility and acceptability of Leaf Café in younger and older 
adults.

Siette J(1)(2), Guion J(3), Ijaz K(4), Strutt P(5), Porte M(6), Savage G(7), 
Richards D(6).

Author information:
(1)The MARCS Institute for Brain, Behaviour and Development, Western Sydney 
University, Westmead, NSW, 2145, Australia. joyce.siette@westernsydney.edu.au.
(2)Australian Institute of Health Innovation, Macquarie University, Macquarie 
Park, NSW, 2109, Australia. joyce.siette@westernsydney.edu.au.
(3)The MARCS Institute for Brain, Behaviour and Development, Western Sydney 
University, Westmead, NSW, 2145, Australia.
(4)Affective Interactions Lab, School of Architecture, Design and Planning, 
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(5)School of Psychology, Western Sydney University, Kingswood, NSW, 2747, 
Australia.
(6)School of Computing, Macquarie University, Macquarie Park, NSW, 2109, 
Australia.
(7)School of Psychological Sciences, Macquarie University, Macquarie Park, NSW, 
2109, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Existing traditional cognitive screening tools for dementia 
have various limitations, including overreliance on tests assessing verbal 
memory and, to a lesser extent, on some aspects of executive functioning. 
Comprehensive neuropsychological assessment is sensitive to impairment but 
time-intensive and expensive. Virtual reality may provide a dynamic and unique 
understanding of cognitive performance and increase the ecological validity of 
cognitive assessment. The use of virtual reality in screening for cognitive 
function in older persons is promising, but evidence for its use remains sparse.
OBJECTIVE: Our primary aim was to examine the feasibility and acceptability of a 
newly developed, virtual reality assessment module, 'Leaf Café', a 
computer-based program that assesses cognition in an engaging, efficient, and 
ecologically relevant way. The secondary aim was to assess the ability of the 
module to discriminate between performances of younger and older adults.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was carried out in Sydney, Australia, targeting 
adults aged 18 years and above. Participants completed a traditional cognitive 
screening tool (Telephone Interview for Cognitive Status-Modified, TICS-M) and 
Leaf Café, a low-immersive virtual reality module designed to evaluate learning 
and memory, perceptual-motor function, and executive functioning. The total 
performance score for each participant, ranging from 0 to 180, was correlated 
with their cognitive performance assessed by TICS-M, using Pearson's correlation 
coefficient. Following module completion, participants were presented with an 
open and closed-question survey to capture their perceptions, attitudes, and 
feedback on the module, encompassing practicality, acceptability, and enjoyment. 
Both descriptive and content analyses were employed to interpret the obtained 
data.
RESULTS: A sample of 131 participants (mean age 54.9 years, SD = 20.8, range 
20-85) took part. The majority were female (71.8%) and born in an 
English-speaking country (75.8%). The mean amount of time spent in the module 
was 32.8 min (SD = 13.3) with a mean module score of 107.6 (SD = 38.7). Most 
participants completed the highest level (5; 80.5%). There was a significant 
correlation between Leaf Café total scores with TICS-M cognitive scores overall, 
and for both younger (aged 18-64 years) and older adult (aged 65 + years) 
groups. No significant difference was found on performance between age groups on 
TICS-M performance, however, younger adults had significantly better performance 
on the Leaf Café module than older adults (M = 124.1 vs 95.9; p < .001). 
Participants had similar response proportions regarding user experience with 
most agreeing that the module was easy to use (84%) and to navigate (85%). 
Compared with younger adults, older adults had lower rates of agreement on the 
module's design (36.8% vs 64.3%; p = .020) and support experienced (20.5% vs 
53.6%; p = .007). Participants highlighted the significance of practicality and 
the cognitive challenges presented by the module, in terms of memory strain and 
user interface concerns. Feedback encompassed different opinions on the 
usefulness of music, with suggestions for improvements centred around clearer 
instructions, varied game dynamics, and considerations for diverse user needs.
CONCLUSIONS: Leaf Café is a feasible and acceptable tool to be used for 
screening for cognitive impairment in older adults and has real-world assessment 
value. Further verification on the game's utility in detecting cognitive 
impairment is required.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12911-024-02478-3
PMCID: PMC10949698
PMID: 38504250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests. 