1. Depress Anxiety. 2024 Jun 28;2024:1790168. doi: 10.1155/2024/1790168. 
eCollection 2024.

Music's Dual Role in Emotion Regulation: Network Analysis of Music Use, Emotion 
Regulation Self-Efficacy, Alexithymia, Anxiety, and Depression.

Tan M(1)(2), Zhou X(1)(2), Shen L(1)(2)(3), Li Y(1)(2), Chen X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Mental Health, Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
101408, China.
(3)Faculty of Education, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China.

Music serves as a prevalent emotional regulation tool among young people. 
However, the correlational and causal relationships between music use, emotion 
regulation ability, and emotional symptoms remain unclear. This study aimed to 
investigate the associations and causal relationships between healthy and 
unhealthy music use, emotion regulation ability, and emotional symptoms, 
including alexithymia, depression, and anxiety. This study included 16,588 
college students nationwide in China. All participants were assessed online with 
the Healthy-Unhealthy Music Scale (HUMS), the Regulatory Emotional Self-Efficacy 
Scale (RESE), the Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS-20), and the 10-item Kessler 
Psychological Stress Scale (K10) using a cluster convenience sampling method. We 
applied a regularized partial correlation network (RPCN) and Bayesian network to 
analyze the network characteristics of the outcomes. In the RPCN analysis, 
healthy music use showed the second strongest expected influence (one-step) and 
correlated positively with emotion regulation self-efficacy while inversely 
correlating with externally oriented thinking of alexithymia and depression. The 
Bayesian network indicated that healthy music use was located downstream of the 
network, positively predicted by managing anger-irritation and expressing 
positive affect in emotion regulation self-efficacy. In contrast, unhealthy 
music use in the RPCN displayed the strongest bridge strength and bridge 
expected influence (one-step). It negatively correlated with expressing positive 
affect in emotion regulation self-efficacy and positively correlated with 
alexithymia, anxiety, and depression. The Bayesian network highlighted that 
unhealthy music use was positively affected by anxiety, depression, and 
difficulty identifying feelings. In addition, managing despondency-distress 
influences difficulty identifying feelings through depression, subsequently 
affecting unhealthy music use and, finally, influencing externally oriented 
thinking. This study provides a novel framework for understanding the role of 
emotion regulation self-efficacy and alexithymia in the relationship between 
music use and emotional symptoms. Emotion regulation and mental health may 
benefit from music-based interventions and therapies informed by the findings of 
this study.

Copyright Â© 2024 Min Tan et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2024/1790168
PMCID: PMC11921861
PMID: 40226650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.