1. Neuroimage. 2019 Dec;203:116199. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116199. Epub 
2019 Sep 16.

Modality-general representations of valences perceived from visual and auditory 
modalities.

Gu J(1), Cao L(1), Liu B(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300350, 
PR China.
(2)School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and 
Technology Beijing, Beijing, 100083, PR China. Electronic address: 
liubaolin@tsinghua.edu.cn.

Valence is a dimension of emotion and can be either positive, negative, or 
neutral. Valences can be expressed through the visual and auditory modalities, 
and the valences of each modality can be conveyed by different types of stimuli 
(face, body, voice or music). This study focused on the modality-general 
representations of valences, that is, valence information can be shared across 
not only visual and auditory modalities but also different types of stimuli 
within each modality. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data were 
collected when subjects made affective judgment on silent videos (face and body) 
and audio clips (voice and music). The searchlight analysis helped to locate 
four areas that might be sensitive to the representations of modality-general 
valences, including the bilateral postcentral gyrus, left middle temporal gyrus 
(MTG) and right middle frontal gyrus (MFG). Further cross-modal classification 
based on multivoxel pattern analysis (MVPA) was performed as a validation 
analysis, which suggested that only the left postcentral gyrus could 
successfully distinguish three valences (positive versus negative and versus 
neutral: PvsNvs0) across different types of stimuli (face, body, voice or 
music), and the classification was also successful in left MTG across the 
stimuli types of face and body. The univariate analysis further found the 
valence-specific activation differences across stimulus types in MTG. Our study 
showed that the left postcentral gyrus was informative to valence 
representations, and extended the research about valence representation that the 
modality-general representation of valences across not only visual and auditory 
modalities but also different types of stimuli within each modality.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116199
PMID: 31536804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]