1. Ann Med. 2025 Dec;57(1):2476728. doi: 10.1080/07853890.2025.2476728. Epub 2025
 Mar 10.

Development of color learning protocol based on music-color association for 
people with visual impairment.

Park HY(1).

Author information:
(1)Music Therapy Major, Graduate School of Church Music, Kosin University, 
Busan, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: This research developed and confirmed the feasibility of a 
color-learning mobile application for people with visual impairment based on the 
hypothesis that the music-color association may be synaesthetically induced 
through emotion.
METHODS: In total, 120 participants with visual impairment, comprising 60 
congenital and 60 adventitious cases, were recruited. They underwent sequential 
procedures: Procedure 1 involved selecting color-music associations and 
designing tasks; Procedure 2 focused on application development with 
accessibility features; and Procedure 3 verified usability and effectiveness.
RESULTS: Significant improvements were observed in hue, luminance, and 
saturation scores following the use of the music-color association application 
among participants with both congenital and adventitious visual impairment. The 
effectiveness of the application in facilitating color learning is evident, 
suggesting its potential utility in enhancing color perception in this 
population.
CONCLUSIONS: This research introduces a novel framework for color learning among 
visually impaired individuals using a music-based synesthetic approach. The 
developed mobile application offers a promising avenue for efficiently improving 
color perception and learning, thereby addressing the critical need for 
accessibility and education for this population. Further research should explore 
the long-term effects and broader applications of synesthetic-induced learning 
in diverse contexts.

DOI: 10.1080/07853890.2025.2476728
PMCID: PMC11894748
PMID: 40059778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was 
conducted without any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.