1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2025 Mar 7;3(3):CD003477. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD003477.pub5.

Music-based therapeutic interventions for people with dementia.

van der Steen JT(1)(2)(3), van der Wouden JC(4), Methley AM(5), Smaling 
HJA(1)(6), Vink AC(7), Bruinsma MS(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Leiden University Medical 
Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Primary and Community Care and Radboudumc Alzheimer Center, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(3)Cicely Saunders Institute, King's College London, London, UK.
(4)Department of General Practice and Department of Medicine for Older People, 
Amsterdam Public Health Research Institute, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(5)Innovative Clinical Psychology Solutions Ltd, London, UK.
(6)University Network for the Care Sector Zuid-Holland, Leiden University 
Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
(7)Music Therapy Department, ArtEZ University of the Arts, Enschede, 
Netherlands.
(8)Muzis, Praktijk voor Muziektherapie, Amersfoort, Netherlands.
(9)Department of Creative Arts Therapies, HU University of Applied Sciences 
Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.

Update of
    doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD003477.pub4.

BACKGROUND: Dementia is a clinical syndrome with a number of different causes. 
It is characterised by deterioration in cognitive, behavioural, social and 
emotional functioning. Pharmacological interventions are available but have 
limited effect on many of the syndrome's features. However, receptivity to music 
may remain until the late phases of dementia, and music-based therapeutic 
interventions (which include, but are not limited to, music therapy) are 
suitable for people with advanced dementia. As there is uncertainty about the 
effectiveness of music-based therapeutic interventions, trials are being 
conducted to evaluate this. This review updates one last published in 2018 and 
examines the current evidence for the effects of music-based interventions for 
people with dementia.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of music-based therapeutic interventions for 
people with dementia on emotional well-being (including quality of life), mood 
disturbance or negative affect (i.e. depressive symptoms and anxiety), 
behavioural problems (i.e. overall behavioural problems or neuropsychiatric 
symptoms, and more specifically agitation or aggression), social behaviour and 
cognition, at the end of therapy and four or more weeks after the end of 
treatment, and to assess any adverse effects.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Dementia and Cognitive Improvement 
Group's Specialised Register, MEDLINE (Ovid SP), Embase (Ovid SP), PsycINFO 
(Ovid SP), CINAHL (EBSCOhost), Web of Science Core Collection (ISI Web of 
Science), LILACS (BIREME), ClinicalTrials.gov and the World Health 
Organisation's meta-register-the International Clinical Trials Registry Platform 
on 30 November 2023.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials of music-based 
therapeutic interventions (of at least five sessions) for people with dementia 
that measured any of our outcomes of interest. Control groups either received 
usual care or other activities with or without music.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors worked independently to screen 
the retrieved studies against the inclusion criteria and then to extract data 
from included studies and assess their risk of bias. If necessary, we contacted 
trial authors to ask for additional data, such as relevant subscales. We pooled 
data using the random-effects model. We assessed the certainty of the evidence 
for our two comparisons and our main outcomes of interest using GRADE.
MAIN RESULTS: We included 30 studies with 1720 randomised participants that were 
conducted in 15 countries. Twenty-eight studies with 1366 participants 
contributed data to meta-analyses. Ten studies contributed data to long-term 
outcomes. Participants had dementia of varying degrees of severity and resided 
in institutions in most of the studies. Seven studies delivered an individual 
intervention; the other studies delivered the intervention to groups. Most 
interventions involved both active and receptive elements of musical experience. 
The studies were at high risk of performance bias and some were at high risk of 
detection or other bias. For music-based therapeutic interventions compared to 
usual care, we found moderate-certainty evidence that, at the end of treatment, 
music-based therapeutic interventions probably improved depressive symptoms 
slightly (standardised mean difference (SMD) -0.23, 95% confidence interval (CI) 
-0.42 to -0.04; 9 studies, 441 participants), and we found low-certainty 
evidence that it may have improved overall behavioural problems (SMD -0.31, 95% 
CI -0.60 to -0.02; 10 studies, 385 participants). We found moderate-certainty 
evidence that music-based therapeutic interventions likely did not improve 
agitation or aggression (SMD -0.05, 95% CI -0.27 to 0.17; 11 studies, 503 
participants). Low to very low certainty evidence showed that they did not 
improve emotional well-being (SMD 0.14, 95% CI -0.29 to 0.56; 4 studies, 154 
participants), anxiety (SMD -0.15, 95% CI -0.39 to 0.09; 7 studies, 282 
participants), social behaviour (SMD 0.22, 95% CI -0.14 to 0.57; 2 studies; 121 
participants) or cognition (SMD 0.19, 95% CI -0.02 to 0.41; 7 studies, 353 
participants). Low or very-low -certainty evidence showed that music-based 
therapeutic interventions may not have been more effective than usual care in 
the long term (four weeks or more after the end of treatment) for any of the 
outcomes. For music-based therapeutic interventions compared to other 
interventions, we found low-certainty evidence that, at the end of treatment, 
music-based therapeutic interventions may have been more effective than the 
other activities for social behaviour (SMD 0.52, 95% CI 0.08 to 0.96; 4 studies, 
84 participants). We found very low-certainty evidence of a positive effect on 
anxiety (SMD -0.75, 95% CI -1.27 to -0.24; 10 studies, 291 participants). For 
all other outcomes, low-certainty evidence showed no evidence of an effect: 
emotional well-being (SMD 0.20, 95% CI -0.09 to 0.49; 9 studies, 298 
participants); depressive symptoms (SMD -0.14, 95% CI -0.36 to 0.08; 10 studies, 
359 participants); agitation or aggression (SMD 0.01, 95% CI -0.31 to 0.32; 6 
studies, 168 participants); overall behavioural problems (SMD -0.08, 95% CI 
-0.33 to 0.17; 8 studies, 292 participants) and cognition (SMD 0.12, 95% CI 
-0.21 to 0.45; 5 studies; 147 participants). We found low or very-low certainty 
evidence that music-based therapeutic interventions may not have been more 
effective than other interventions in the long term (four weeks or more after 
the end of treatment) for any of the outcomes. Adverse effects were 
inconsistently measured or recorded, but no serious adverse events were 
reported.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: When compared to usual care, providing people with 
dementia with at least five sessions of a music-based therapeutic intervention 
probably improves depressive symptoms and may improve overall behavioural 
problems at the end of treatment. When compared to other activities, music-based 
therapeutic interventions may improve social behaviour at the end of treatment. 
No conclusions can be reached about the outcome of anxiety as the certainty of 
the evidence is very low. There may be no effects on other outcomes at the end 
of treatment. There was no evidence of long-term effects from music-based 
therapeutic interventions. Adverse effects may be rare, but the studies were 
inconsistent in their reporting of adverse effects. Future studies should 
examine the duration of effects in relation to the overall duration of treatment 
and the number of sessions.

Copyright © 2025 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003477.pub5
PMCID: PMC11884930
PMID: 40049590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JS declares that she is involved in a trial on a 
music‐based therapeutic intervention for people with dementia. She is serving as 
a methodologist and is supervising the PhD student who is conducting the trial, 
which could qualify for inclusion in a future update of this review. This study 
started in 2019 and has concluded recently (results not fully available yet); it 
was funded by university funds and Alzheimer Nederland. JW declares that he has 
no conflicts of interest. AM is a Senior Clinical Psychologist and sole 
proprietor of the business Innovative Clinical Psychology Solutions Ltd (from 9 
March 2021 to present), a private clinical psychology practice; she can see 
patients with dementia and neurological conditions due to her training, but this 
is not her primary client group. Until 29 December 2022, AM was employed by the 
NHS and saw people with suspected and confirmed cases of dementia clinically 
within this role. AM declares consultancy fees from Cochrane to Innovative 
Clinical Psychology Solutions Ltd for payment for contributing to this review 
(i.e. to assist with the process of the updated systematic search, including 
abstract screening and data extraction); this was a personal payment. HS 
declares that she has no conflicts of interest. AV is affiliated with the ArtEZ 
Music Therapy Department, and she has published opinion pieces on the website 
artez.nl. AV declares that she was involved in a study supported by the national 
funder ZonMw, an independent organisation that supports research and innovation 
in health, healthcare and well‐being, as part of her dissertation at UMCG The 
Netherlands, which was eligible for inclusion in the review**. AV is involved in 
music therapy research and teaching. MB is involved in teaching and practice of 
music therapy in persons with dementia. She declares that she has no conflicts 
of interest. **We included two studies on which AV was an author. AV was not 
involved in assessing the eligibility of these studies, extracting data from 
them, assessing their risk of bias or grading the certainty of evidence 
involving these studies. These tasks were performed by JS and HS, and for other 
articles also by JW and AM. The lead review author, JS, and a co‐author who is a 
Cochrane expert (JW; and also RS in previous versions), made the final decisions 
about analysis, presentation and interpretation of the data. None of the authors 
has a conflict of interest related to the effectiveness of music therapy.