1. Sci Rep. 2025 Mar 10;15(1):8276. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-92679-1.

Music tempo modulates emotional states as revealed through EEG insights.

Yang Z(1), Su Q(2), Xie J(1), Su H(2), Huang T(2), Han C(1), Zhang S(1), Zhang 
K(3), Xu G(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Mechanical Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710049, 
China.
(2)Joint School of Design and Innovation, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 
710049, China.
(3)Faillace Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, McGovern Medical 
School, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)School of Mechanical Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710049, 
China. ghxu@mail.xjtu.edu.cn.
(5)State Key Laboratory for Manufacturing Systems Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong 
University, Xi'an, 710049, China. ghxu@mail.xjtu.edu.cn.
(6)The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China. 
ghxu@mail.xjtu.edu.cn.

Music can effectively influence human emotions, with different melodies and 
rhythms eliciting varying emotional responses. Among these, tempo is one of the 
most important parameters affecting emotions. This study explores the impact of 
music tempo on emotional states and the associated brain functional networks. A 
total of 26 participants without any history of neurological or psychiatric 
disorders and music training took part in the experiment, using classical piano 
music clips at different tempi (56, 106, 156 bpm) as stimuli. The study was 
conducted using emotional scales and electroencephalogram (EEG) analysis. The 
results showed that the valence level of emotions significantly increased with 
music tempo, while the arousal level exhibited a "V" shape relationship. EEG 
analysis revealed significant changes in brainwave signals across different 
frequency bands under different tempi. For instance, slow tempo induced higher 
Theta and Alpha power in the frontal region, while fast tempo increased Beta and 
Gamma band power. Moreover, fast tempo enhanced the average connectivity 
strength in the frontal, temporal, and occipital regions, and increased phase 
synchrony value (PLV) between the frontal and parietal regions. However, slow 
tempo improves PLV between the occipital and parietal regions. The findings of 
this study elucidate the effects of music tempo on the brain functional networks 
related to emotion regulation, providing a theoretical basis for music-assisted 
diagnosis and treatment of mood disorders. Furthermore, these results suggest 
potential applications in emotion robotics, emotion-based human-computer 
interaction, and emotion-based intelligent control.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-025-92679-1
PMCID: PMC11893886
PMID: 40065030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests. Ethics declarations: This study has been approved by the 
Biomedical Ethics Committee of Xi’an Jiaotong University (No. 2023−1552). 
Approval for human experiments: Informed consent was obtained from all 
participants.