1. J Affect Disord. 2025 Apr 1:S0165-0327(25)00522-1. doi: 
10.1016/j.jad.2025.03.173. Online ahead of print.

The efficacy of psychotherapeutic interventions for prolonged grief disorder: A 
systematic review.

Srivastava T(1), Lee K(2), Ehrenkranz R(3), Cozzolino P(4), Wise FA(5), Burns 
M(6), McCormick T(7), Yaden D(8), Agrawal M(9), Penberthy JK(10).

Author information:
(1)University of Virginia, Department of Psychiatry & Neurobehavioral Sciences, 
Division of Perceptual Studies, P.O. Box 800152, Charlottesville, VA 22908-0152, 
United States of America. Electronic address: TS5SS@uvahealth.org.
(2)University of Virginia, Department of Psychiatry & Neurobehavioral Sciences, 
Division of Perceptual Studies, P.O. Box 800152, Charlottesville, VA 22908-0152, 
United States of America. Electronic address: RRA4WY@uvahealth.org.
(3)Johns Hopkins Center for Psychedelic and Consciousness Research, Baltimore, 
MD 21224, United States of America. Electronic address: rehrenk1@jh.edu.
(4)University of Virginia, Department of Psychiatry & Neurobehavioral Sciences, 
Division of Perceptual Studies, P.O. Box 800152, Charlottesville, VA 22908-0152, 
United States of America. Electronic address: RXQ6QZ@uvahealth.org.
(5)University of Virginia, Department of Psychiatry & Neurobehavioral Sciences, 
Division of Perceptual Studies, P.O. Box 800152, Charlottesville, VA 22908-0152, 
United States of America. Electronic address: RGZ8UD@uvahealth.org.
(6)University of Virginia, Department of Psychiatry & Neurobehavioral Sciences, 
Division of Perceptual Studies, P.O. Box 800152, Charlottesville, VA 22908-0152, 
United States of America. Electronic address: FFP7HJ@uvahealth.org.
(7)University of Virginia, Department of Psychiatry & Neurobehavioral Sciences, 
Division of Perceptual Studies, P.O. Box 800152, Charlottesville, VA 22908-0152, 
United States of America. Electronic address: THM8RC@uvahealth.org.
(8)Johns Hopkins Center for Psychedelic and Consciousness Research, Baltimore, 
MD 21224, United States of America. Electronic address: dyaden1@jhmi.edu.
(9)Sunstone Therapies, Rockville, MD 20850, United States of America. Electronic 
address: manish.agrawal@sunstonetherapies.com.
(10)University of Virginia, Department of Psychiatry & Neurobehavioral Sciences, 
Division of Perceptual Studies, P.O. Box 800152, Charlottesville, VA 22908-0152, 
United States of America. Electronic address: jkp2n@uvahealth.org.

Prolonged Grief Disorder (PGD), newly recognized in the ICD-11 and DSM-5-TR, 
represents a severe and persistent bereavement response that disrupts adaptive 
functioning. Characterized by intense yearning, preoccupation with the deceased, 
and profound social and emotional disturbances, PGD is associated with adverse 
physical and mental health outcomes. While most individuals progress from acute 
to integrated grief, those with PGD remain entrenched in maladaptive grief 
patterns. With prevalence estimates ranging from 9.8 % to 34.3 % in bereaved 
populations, especially following traumatic or sudden losses, the need for 
effective interventions is urgent. This systematic review examines the efficacy 
of psychotherapeutic interventions for PGD across 30 randomized controlled 
trials published between 2011 and 2024. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) 
emerged as the predominant and most effective approach, demonstrating 
versatility across individual, group, and internet-based formats. Innovations 
such as combining CBT with mindfulness, exposure therapy, or EMDR showed 
promise, particularly in addressing trauma-related grief. Alternative 
interventions, including music therapy and Accelerated Resolution Therapy, 
revealed potential benefits but require further investigation. Mindfulness-based 
therapies, while less prevalent, showed modest efficacy when integrated with CBT 
frameworks. Findings emphasize the need for personalized, culturally sensitive 
treatments tailored to the diverse circumstances of grief. The success of 
internet-delivered interventions highlights opportunities to expand access, 
particularly in resource-limited settings. Despite progress, gaps remain in 
understanding the role of pharmacological adjuncts, long-term outcomes, and 
underrepresented populations. This review underscores the importance of 
advancing therapeutic approaches to mitigate PGD's profound impact on 
individuals and communities, proposing directions for future research and 
clinical practice.

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2025.03.173
PMID: 40180039

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no competing interests.