1. IEEE Open J Eng Med Biol. 2024 Mar 18;5:627-636. doi: 
10.1109/OJEMB.2024.3377923. eCollection 2024.

Bayesian Inference of Hidden Cognitive Performance and Arousal States in 
Presence of Music.

Khazaei S(1), Amin MR(2), Tahir M(2), Faghih RT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical EngineeringNew York University New York NY 10010 
USA.
(2)Department of Electrical and Computer EngineeringUniversity of Houston 
Houston TX 77004 USA.

Goal: Poor arousal management may lead to reduced cognitive performance. 
Specifying a model and decoder to infer the cognitive arousal and performance 
contributes to arousal regulation via non-invasive actuators such as music. 
Methods: We employ a Bayesian filtering approach within an 
expectation-maximization framework to track the hidden states during the 
[Formula: see text]-back task in the presence of calming and exciting music. We 
decode the arousal and performance states from the skin conductance and 
behavioral signals, respectively. We derive an arousal-performance model based 
on the Yerkes-Dodson law. We design a performance-based arousal decoder by 
considering the corresponding performance and skin conductance as the 
observation. Results: The quantified arousal and performance are presented. The 
existence of Yerkes-Dodson law can be interpreted from the arousal-performance 
relationship. Findings display higher matrices of performance within the 
exciting music. Conclusions: The performance-based arousal decoder has a better 
agreement with the Yerkes-Dodson law. Our study can be implemented in designing 
non-invasive closed-loop systems.

Â© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1109/OJEMB.2024.3377923
PMCID: PMC11342937
PMID: 39184959