1. Front Psychol. 2023 Jun 6;14:1158172. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1158172. 
eCollection 2023.

AffectMachine-Classical: a novel system for generating affective classical 
music.

Agres KR(#)(1)(2), Dash A(#)(1), Chua P(3).

Author information:
(1)Yong Siew Toh Conservatory of Music, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Centre for Music and Health, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(3)Augmented Human Lab, DISA, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(#)Contributed equally

This work introduces a new music generation system, called 
AffectMachine-Classical, that is capable of generating affective Classic music 
in real-time. AffectMachine was designed to be incorporated into biofeedback 
systems (such as brain-computer-interfaces) to help users become aware of, and 
ultimately mediate, their own dynamic affective states. That is, this system was 
developed for music-based MedTech to support real-time emotion self-regulation 
in users. We provide an overview of the rule-based, probabilistic system 
architecture, describing the main aspects of the system and how they are novel. 
We then present the results of a listener study that was conducted to validate 
the ability of the system to reliably convey target emotions to listeners. The 
findings indicate that AffectMachine-Classical is very effective in 
communicating various levels of Arousal (R2 = 0.96) to listeners, and is also 
quite convincing in terms of Valence (R2 = 0.90). Future work will embed 
AffectMachine-Classical into biofeedback systems, to leverage the efficacy of 
the affective music for emotional wellbeing in listeners.

Copyright Â© 2023 Agres, Dash and Chua.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1158172
PMCID: PMC10281186
PMID: 37346414

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.