1. IEEE Trans Affect Comput. 2015 Oct-Dec;6(4):361-370. doi: 
10.1109/TAFFC.2015.2422702. Epub 2015 Apr 13.

Head Movement Dynamics During Play and Perturbed Mother-Infant Interaction.

Hammal Z(1), Cohn JF(2), Messinger DS(3).

Author information:
(1)The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)the Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University and the Department of 
Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)the Department of Psychology at the University of Miami with secondary 
appointment in Pediatrics, Electrical and Computer Engineering, and Music 
Engineering, University of Miami, FL, USA.

We investigated the dynamics of head movement in mothers and infants during an 
age-appropriate, well-validated emotion induction, the Still Face paradigm. In 
this paradigm, mothers and infants play normally for 2 minutes (Play) followed 
by 2 minutes in which the mothers remain unresponsive (Still Face), and then two 
minutes in which they resume normal behavior (Reunion). Participants were 42 
ethnically diverse 4-month-old infants and their mothers. Mother and infant 
angular displacement and angular velocity were measured using the CSIRO head 
tracker. In male but not female infants, angular displacement increased from 
Play to Still-Face and decreased from Still Face to Reunion. Infant angular 
velocity was higher during Still-Face than Reunion with no differences between 
male and female infants. Windowed cross-correlation suggested changes in how 
infant and mother head movements are associated, revealing dramatic changes in 
direction of association. Coordination between mother and infant head movement 
velocity was greater during Play compared with Reunion. Together, these findings 
suggest that angular displacement, angular velocity and their coordination 
between mothers and infants are strongly related to age-appropriate emotion 
challenge. Attention to head movement can deepen our understanding of emotion 
communication.

DOI: 10.1109/TAFFC.2015.2422702
PMCID: PMC4666546
PMID: 26640622