1. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2020 Jul;2020:841-846. doi: 
10.1109/EMBC44109.2020.9175482.

Exploring EEG microstates for affective computing: decoding valence and arousal 
experiences during video watching().

Shen X, Hu X, Liu S, Song S, Zhang D.

Investigating the electroencephalography (EEG) correlates of human emotional 
experiences has attracted increasing interest in the field of affective 
computing. Substantial progress has been made during the past decades, mainly by 
using EEG features extracted from localized brain activities. The present study 
explored a brain network-based feature defined by EEG microstates for a possible 
representation of emotional experiences. A publicly available and widely used 
benchmarking EEG dataset called DEAP was used, in which 32 participants watched 
40 one-minute music videos with their 32channel EEG recorded. Four quasi-stable 
prototypical microstates were obtained, and their temporal parameters were 
extracted as features. In random forest regression, the microstate features 
showed better performances for decoding valence (model fitting mean squared 
error (MSE) = 3.85±0.28 and 4.07 ± 0.30, respectively, p = 0.022) and comparable 
performances for decoding arousal (MSE = 3.30±0.30 and 3.41 ±0.31, respectively, 
p = 0.169), as compared to conventional spectral power features. As microstate 
features describe neural activities from a global spatiotemporal dynamical 
perspective, our findings demonstrate a possible new mechanism for understanding 
human emotion and provide a promising type of EEG feature for affective 
computing.

DOI: 10.1109/EMBC44109.2020.9175482
PMID: 33018116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]