1. Comput Biol Med. 2024 Sep;179:108807. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2024.108807. 
Epub 2024 Jul 5.

Emotion analysis and recognition in 3D space using classifier-dependent feature 
selection in response to tactile enhanced audio-visual content using EEG.

Raheel A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Engineering, University of Engineering and Technology 
Taxila, Pakistan. Electronic address: asim.raheel@uettaxila.edu.pk.

Traditional media such as text, images, audio, and video primarily target 
specific senses like vision and hearing. In contrast, multiple sensorial media 
aims to create immersive experiences by integrating additional sensory 
modalities such as touch, smell, and taste where applicable. Tactile enhanced 
audio-visual content leverages the sense of touch in addition to visual and 
auditory stimuli, aiming to create a more immersive and engaging interaction for 
users. Previously, tactile enhanced content has been explored in 2D emotional 
space (valence and arousal). In this paper, EEG data against tactile enhanced 
audio-visual content is labeled based on a self-assessment manikin scale in 3 
dimensions i.e., valence, arousal, and dominance. Statistical significance (with 
a 95% confidence interval) is also established based on gathered scores, 
highlighting a significant difference in the arousal and dominance dimension of 
traditional media and tactile enhanced media. A new methodology is proposed 
using classifier-dependent feature selection approach to classify valence, 
arousal, and dominance states using three different classifiers. A highest 
accuracy of 75%, 73.8%, and 75% is achieved for classifying valence, arousal, 
and dominance states, respectively. The proposed scheme outperforms previous 
emotion recognition based studies in response to enhanced multimedia content in 
terms of accuracy, F-score, and other error parameters.

Copyright Â© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2024.108807
PMID: 38970831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.