1. Front Psychol. 2024 Aug 21;15:1344350. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1344350. 
eCollection 2024.

The relative importance of affect variability and mean levels of affect in 
predicting complex task performance.

North MN(1), Huck JT(2), Day EA(1), Jorgensen AG(3), Richels KA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK, United States.
(2)Institutional Analytics & Research, Western Governors University, Salt Lake 
City, UT, United States.
(3)Human Resources Research Organization (HumRRO), Alexandria, VA, United 
States.
(4)Colarelli, Meyer & Associates, Denver, CO, United States.

Although research indicates affect variability-the extent to which an 
individual's emotions fluctuate-is associated with behavioral outcomes related 
to adjustment and adaptability, it is unclear to what extent findings make 
important contributions to the literature when past research has failed to 
account for the role of mean levels of emotion. Accordingly, we conducted a 
repeated-measures laboratory study of college students (N = 253) learning to 
perform a complex computer task to examine the relative importance of affect 
variability indices (i.e., spin, pulse, and flux) compared to mean levels in 
explaining variance in off-task attention and task performance before and after 
changes in task demands (i.e., skill acquisition and adaptation). In doing so, 
we also disentangled valence and arousal (i.e., activating versus deactivating) 
aspects of emotion. Relative importance analyses showed mean levels of emotion 
were the most dominant predictors (i.e., explained the most variance)-negative 
deactivating emotions for off-task attention and positive activating emotions 
for performance. However, flux in negative activating and negative deactivating 
emotions also explained enough variance to be considered important, suggesting 
that flux has been overlooked in empirical research. Our findings also highlight 
that future research must account for mean levels when examining relationships 
between affect variability and outcomes of interest.

Copyright Â© 2024 North, Huck, Day, Jorgensen and Richels.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1344350
PMCID: PMC11372583
PMID: 39233881

Conflict of interest statement: KR is employed by Colarelli, Meyer & Associates. 
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of 
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.