1. Sci Rep. 2024 Nov 13;14(1):27766. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-78156-1.

Music communicates social emotions: Evidence from 750 music excerpts.

Pring EX(1), Olsen KN(2), Mobbs AED(1), Thompson WF(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychological Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia.
(2)Australian Institute of Health Innovation, Macquarie University, Sydney, 
Australia.
(3)School of Psychological Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia. 
bthompso@bond.edu.au.
(4)Faculty of Society and Design, Bond University, Gold Coast, Australia. 
bthompso@bond.edu.au.

Humans perceive a range of basic emotional connotations from music, such as joy, 
sadness, and fear, which can be decoded from structural characteristics of 
music, such as rhythm, harmony, and timbre. However, despite theory and evidence 
that music has multiple social functions, little research has examined whether 
music conveys emotions specifically associated with social status and social 
connection. This investigation aimed to determine whether the social emotions of 
dominance and affiliation are perceived in music and whether structural features 
of music predict social emotions, just as they predict basic emotions. 
Participants (N = 1513) listened to subsets of 750 music excerpts and provided 
ratings of energy arousal, tension arousal, valence, dominance, and affiliation. 
Ratings were modelled based on ten structural features of music. Dominance and 
affiliation were readily perceived in music and predicted by structural features 
including rhythm, harmony, dynamics, and timbre. In turn, energy arousal, 
tension arousal and valence were also predicted by musical structure. We discuss 
the results in view of current models of music and emotion and propose research 
to illuminate the significance of social emotions in music.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-78156-1
PMCID: PMC11557968
PMID: 39532962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Competing interests The authors 
declare no competing interests.