1. Sci Data. 2024 Jun 19;11(1):648. doi: 10.1038/s41597-024-03429-3.

EmoWear: Wearable Physiological and Motion Dataset for Emotion Recognition and 
Context Awareness.

Rahmani MH(1), Symons M(2), Sobhani O(3), Berkvens R(3), Weyn M(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Antwerp - imec, IDLab - Faculty of Applied Engineering, 
Sint-Pietersvliet 7, Antwerp, 2000, Belgium. mohammad.rahmani@uantwerpen.be.
(2)Department of Communication Studies, Faculty of Social Sciences, University 
of Antwerp, Antwerp, 2000, Belgium.
(3)University of Antwerp - imec, IDLab - Faculty of Applied Engineering, 
Sint-Pietersvliet 7, Antwerp, 2000, Belgium.

The EmoWear dataset provides a bridge to explore Emotion Recognition (ER) via 
Seismocardiography (SCG), the measurement of small cardio-respiratory induced 
vibrations on the chest wall through Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs). We 
recorded Accelerometer (ACC), Gyroscope (GYRO), Electrocardiography (ECG), Blood 
Volume Pulse (BVP), Respiration (RSP), Electrodermal Activity (EDA), and Skin 
Temperature (SKT) data from 49 participants who watched validated emotionally 
stimulating video clips. They self-assessed their emotional valence, arousal, 
and dominance, as well as extra questions about the video clips. Also, we asked 
the participants to walk, talk, and drink, so that researchers can detect gait, 
voice, and swallowing using the same IMU. We demonstrate the effectiveness of 
emotion stimulation with statistical methods and verify the quality of the 
collected signals through signal-to-noise ratio and correlation analysis. 
EmoWear can be used for ER via SCG, ER during gait, multi-modal ER, and the 
study of IMUs for context-awareness. Targeted contextual information include 
emotions, gait, voice activity, and drinking, all having the potential to be 
sensed via a single IMU.

Â© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41597-024-03429-3
PMCID: PMC11187197
PMID: 38898046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.