1. Brain Topogr. 2023 Sep;36(5):698-709. doi: 10.1007/s10548-023-00974-9. Epub
2023  Jun 23.

Sex Differences in Neural Correlates of Emotion Regulation in Relation to 
Resting Heart Rate Variability.

Min J(1)(2), Koenig J(3), Nashiro K(1), Yoo HJ(1), Cho C(1), Thayer JF(4), 
Mather M(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)University of Southern California, Davis School of Gerontology, Los Angeles, 
USA.
(2)University of Southern California, Department of Psychology, Los Angeles, 
USA.
(3)University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, 
Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, 
Cologne, Germany.
(4)University of California Irvine, Department of Psychological Science, Irvine, 
USA.
(5)University of Southern California, Davis School of Gerontology, Los Angeles, 
USA. mara.mather@usc.edu.
(6)University of Southern California, Department of Psychology, Los Angeles, 
USA. mara.mather@usc.edu.

Erratum in
    Brain Topogr. 2024 Nov;37(6):1242. doi: 10.1007/s10548-024-01069-9.

Prior studies suggest that sex differences in emotion regulation (ER) ability 
contribute to sex disparities in affective disorders. In behavioral studies, 
females rely more on maladaptive strategies to cope with emotional distress than 
males. Neuroimaging studies suggest that males more efficiently regulate emotion 
than females by showing less prefrontal cortex activity (suggesting less effort) 
for similar amygdala activity (similar regulation outcome). However, 
physiological studies involving heart rate variability (HRV) indicated that, 
compared with males, females have higher resting HRV, indicative of 
parasympathetic dominance and better control of emotion. To help resolve these 
apparently inconsistent findings, we examined sex differences in how resting HRV 
relates to brain activity while using cognitive reappraisal, one of the adaptive 
strategies. Based on 51 males and 49 females, we found that females showed 
different levels of self-rated emotional intensity and amygdala activity for 
negative versus positive emotions, while males did not. Females also showed 
greater overall prefrontal cortex activity but similar levels of amygdala 
activity compared to males. Sex differences in how resting HRV related to brain 
activity during ER were evident only during viewing or regulating positive 
emotion. The results suggest that sex differences in the neural correlates of ER 
and resting HRV might lie in valence more than arousal modulation.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10548-023-00974-9
PMCID: PMC10415482
PMID: 37353651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.