1. Behav Res Methods. 2024 Oct;56(7):7261-7279. doi: 10.3758/s13428-024-02418-z. 
Epub 2024 May 1.

The standardization of a new Explicit Pornographic Picture Set (EPPS).

Prantner S(1), Giménez-García C(1), Espino-Payá A(2), Escrig MA(3), Ruiz-Padial 
E(4), Ballester-Arnal R(1), Pastor MC(5).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Psicología Básica, Clínica y Psicobiología, Facultad de 
Ciencias de la Salud, Universitat Jaume I, Castelló de la Plana, Spain.
(2)Institute for Biomagnetism and Biosignalanalysis, University of Münster, 
Münster, Germany.
(3)Departamento de Psicología, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad 
Europea de Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
(4)Departamento de Psicología, Universidad de Jaén, Jaén, Spain.
(5)Departamento de Psicología Básica, Clínica y Psicobiología, Facultad de 
Ciencias de la Salud, Universitat Jaume I, Castelló de la Plana, Spain. 
mpastor@uji.es.

Pictures with affective content have been extensively used in scientific studies 
of emotion and sexuality. However, only a few standardized picture sets have 
been developed that offer explicit images, with most lacking pornographic 
pictures depicting diverse sexual practices. This study aimed to fill this gap 
through developing a standardized affective set of diverse pornographic pictures 
(masturbation, oral sex, vaginal sex, anal sex, group sex, paraphilia) of 
same-sex and opposite-sex content, offering dimensional affective ratings of 
valence, arousal, and dominance, as well as co-elicited discrete emotions 
(disgust, moral and ethical acceptance). In total, 192 pornographic pictures 
acquired from online pornography platforms and 24 control IAPS images have been 
rated by 319 participants (Mage = 22.66, SDage = 4.66) with self-reported same- 
and opposite-sex sexual attraction. Stimuli were representative of the entire 
affective space, including positively and negatively perceived pictures. 
Participants showed differential affective perception of pornographic pictures 
according to gender and sexual attraction. Differences in affective ratings 
related to participants' gender and sexual attraction, as well as stimuli 
content (depicted sexual practices and sexes). From the stimuli set, researchers 
can select explicit pornographic pictures based on the obtained affective 
ratings and technical parameters (i.e., pixel size, luminosity, color space, 
contrast, chromatic complexity, spatial frequency, entropy). The stimuli set may 
be considered a valid tool of diverse explicit pornographic pictures covering 
the affective space, in particular, for women and men with same- and 
opposite-sex sexual attraction. This new explicit pornographic picture set 
(EPPS) is available to the scientific community for non-commercial use.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.3758/s13428-024-02418-z
PMCID: PMC11362205
PMID: 38693442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests to 
declare.