1. Q J Exp Psychol (Hove). 2024 May;77(5):1093-1105. doi: 
10.1177/17470218231200955. Epub 2023 Oct 4.

Database of Expressionist, Impressionist, and Post-Impressionist paintings: 
Affective norms for 60 art pieces.

Imbir KK(1), Wielgopolan A(1), StÄ™pniewska J(1), Benda K(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Psychology, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.

Modern painters' art is not only different from canvas created earlier, but also 
shows high internal variability. Being aware of the conditions arising from art 
history, we used paintings from three art movements-Impressionism, 
Post-Impressionism, and Expressionism, to see if we are able to respond to 
claims made by art theorists by using methods specific to social sciences, and 
validate the paintings as stimuli which might evoke different emotional reaction 
based on the movement they were created in. We wanted to conduct an exploratory 
analysis comparing the mean assessment of valence, arousal, and dominance among 
the three art movements. A total of 60 different paintings were selected (20 for 
each art movement) showing figurative works and visible human figures. They were 
assessed on five different affective scales: valence, arousal, dominance, 
origin, and subjective significance with use of Self-Assessment Manikins. The 
results showed expected differences in affective reactions to Expressionist 
paintings compared with those of Impressionist and Post-Impressionist ones. 
Therefore, we provided the very first dataset of emotional stimuli with 
validated affective norms, categorised by the art movement that they were 
created in and ready to be used in future experimental studies.

DOI: 10.1177/17470218231200955
PMID: 37658483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.