1. Arch Sex Behav. 2024 Feb;53(2):715-733. doi: 10.1007/s10508-023-02701-8. Epub 
2023 Oct 20.

Female Affective Perception of Mainstream and Paraphilic Pornography: 
Associations with Sexual and Psychological Intrapersonal Variables.

Prantner S(1), Giménez-García C(1), Espino-Payá A(1)(2), Escrig MA(3), 
Fuentes-Sánchez N(1), Ballester-Arnal R(1), Pastor MC(4).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Psicología Básica, Clínica y Psicobiología, Facultad de 
Ciencias de la Salud, Universitat Jaume I, 12071, Castelló de la Plana, Spain.
(2)Institute for Biomagnetism and Biosignalanalysis, University of Münster, 
Münster, Germany.
(3)Departamento de Psicología. Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad 
Europea de Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
(4)Departamento de Psicología Básica, Clínica y Psicobiología, Facultad de 
Ciencias de la Salud, Universitat Jaume I, 12071, Castelló de la Plana, Spain. 
mpastor@uji.es.

Understanding affective perceptual processes can further contribute to the 
explanation of motivation and actions, as well as sexual risk behaviors. 
Pornography can be considered salient emotional content and is popular, also 
among females. Yet, the female perspective on pornography has often been 
overlooked and it remains unclear how individual variables may be associated 
with the affective perception of pornography and could provide a risk profile. 
Possible associations between several sexual and psychological intrapersonal 
variables and the affective perception of various forms of pornography were 
analyzed from the female perspective. A sample of 231 females (M = 21.87 years; 
SD = 3.9 years) provided ratings of affective valence, arousal, disgust, and 
moral and ethical acceptance for mainstream pornographic and paraphilic images 
of dominance, submission, or sexual violence. Paraphilic pornography was 
perceived as less pleasant, arousing, and moral and ethically acceptable, but 
more disgusting compared to mainstream pornography. This was more pronounced 
among females who had never consumed pornography. Results further suggest that 
the female affective perception of pornography was associated with the following 
sexual intrapersonal variables: sexual sensation seeking for physical 
sensations, erotophilia, lack of sexual control, problematic pornography 
consumption, and sexual disgust sensitivity. Of the assessed psychological 
intrapersonal variables, only anxiety was negatively associated with disgust for 
paraphilic pornography. It is important to further analyze the female affective 
perception of pornography and associated variables to include them in strategies 
for prevention and for addressing problematic consequences of the acceptance of 
specific sexual content and behaviors, especially related to sexualized 
violence.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10508-023-02701-8
PMCID: PMC10844147
PMID: 37863863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests to 
declare.