1. PeerJ Comput Sci. 2024 Jun 24;10:e2104. doi: 10.7717/peerj-cs.2104.
eCollection  2024.

Deep learning-based dimensional emotion recognition for conversational 
agent-based cognitive behavioral therapy.

Striegl J(1), Richter JW(2), Grossmann L(3), Bråstad B(3), Gotthardt M(4), Rück 
C(3), Wallert J(3), Loitsch C(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Scalable Data Analytics and Artificial Intelligence (ScaDS.AI 
Dresden/Leipzig), Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Saxony, Germany.
(2)Chair of Human-Computer Interaction, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, 
Saxony, Germany.
(3)Centre for Psychiatry Research, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Huddinge 
& Stockholm Health Care Services, Region Stockholm, Karolinska Institute, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Kungliga Tekniska Högskolan, Stockholm, Sweden.

Internet-based cognitive behavioral therapy (iCBT) offers a scalable, 
cost-effective, accessible, and low-threshold form of psychotherapy. Recent 
advancements explored the use of conversational agents such as chatbots and 
voice assistants to enhance the delivery of iCBT. These agents can deliver 
iCBT-based exercises, recognize and track emotional states, assess therapy 
progress, convey empathy, and potentially predict long-term therapy outcome. 
However, existing systems predominantly utilize categorical approaches for 
emotional modeling, which can oversimplify the complexity of human emotional 
states. To address this, we developed a transformer-based model for dimensional 
text-based emotion recognition, fine-tuned with a novel, comprehensive 
dimensional emotion dataset comprising 75,503 samples. This model significantly 
outperforms existing state-of-the-art models in detecting the dimensions of 
valence, arousal, and dominance, achieving a Pearson correlation coefficient of 
r = 0.90, r = 0.77, and r = 0.64, respectively. Furthermore, a feasibility study 
involving 20 participants confirmed the model's technical effectiveness and its 
usability, acceptance, and empathic understanding in a conversational 
agent-based iCBT setting, marking a substantial improvement in personalized and 
effective therapy experiences.

©2024 Striegl et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.2104
PMCID: PMC11232613
PMID: 38983201

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing 
interests.