1. Behav Res Methods. 2024 Aug;56(5):4893-4908. doi: 10.3758/s13428-023-02226-x. 
Epub 2023 Oct 6.

ANCW: Affective norms for 4030 Chinese words.

Ying L(1), Ruyang Y(1), Chuanbin N(2), Yeqing W(1), Qing L(1), Yufan Z(1), Fei 
G(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Foreign Languages and Cultures, Nanjing Normal University, No. 122# 
Ninghai Road, Nanjing, 210097, People's Republic of China.
(2)School of Foreign Languages and Cultures, Nanjing Normal University, No. 122# 
Ninghai Road, Nanjing, 210097, People's Republic of China. nichuanbin@263.net.

Affective information contained in words is gaining increased attention among 
neurolinguists and psycholinguists around the world. This study established the 
Affective Norms for Chinese Words (ANCW) with valence, arousal, dominance, and 
concreteness ratings for 4030 words that were Chinese adaptations of the CET-4 
(The National College English Test Band 4) official syllabus. Despite the 
existing Chinese affective norms such as the Chinese Affective Words System 
(CAWS), the ANCW provides much more and richer Chinese vocabulary. By using 
7-point (ranging from 1 to 7) Likert scales in a paper-and-pencil procedure, we 
obtained ratings for all variables from 3717 Chinese undergraduates. The ANCW 
norms possessed good response reliability and were compatible with prior 
normative studies in Chinese. The pairwise correlation analysis revealed 
quadratic relations between valence and arousal, arousal and dominance, as well 
as valence and concreteness. Additionally, valence and dominance, as well as 
arousal and concreteness, presented a linear correlation, and concreteness and 
dominance were correlated. The ANCW provides reliable and standardized stimulus 
materials for further research involving emotional language processing.

Â© 2023. The Psychonomic Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.3758/s13428-023-02226-x
PMID: 37801213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]