1. PLoS One. 2023 Jun 14;18(6):e0285135. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0285135. 
eCollection 2023.

A listener preference model for spatial sound reproduction, incorporating 
affective response.

Moiragias G(1), Mourjopoulos J(1).

Author information:
(1)Audio and Acoustic Technology Group, Department of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering, University of Patras, Rio Patras, Achaia, Greece.

This work presents results and models for listener preference to music delivered 
via different spatial reproduction formats, here via mono, stereo and 
multichannel (5.1-ch) reproduction. Although this problem has been researched in 
the past, the current work introduces an elaborate multistage experimental 
procedure which considers the contribution of listener-specific emotional 
responses (valence and arousal) to his/hers Overall Listening Experience (OLE). 
The test procedure registers the individual listener preference and 
familiarization with the content of each test audio sample. A spatial 
envelopment metric, extracted directly from each audio signal sample is utilized 
as attribute for the perceived differences between the 3 different systems. This 
attribute, along with listener content preference (for each music sample) and 
his/hers affective response attributes are combined into linear regression 
model(s) which can predict the dominant trends for rating OLE. A novel linear 
tree approach is also proposed which highlights additional associations between 
the attributes within this multidimensional space. Comparative performance 
analysis shows that the proposed linear tree approach also achieves improved 
predictions for OLE ratings.

Copyright: Â© 2023 Moiragias, Mourjopoulos. This is an open access article 
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which 
permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided 
the original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0285135
PMCID: PMC10266670
PMID: 37315025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.