1. Entropy (Basel). 2022 Sep 20;24(10):1322. doi: 10.3390/e24101322.

Automated Emotion Identification Using Fourier-Bessel Domain-Based Entropies.

Nalwaya A(1), Das K(1), Pachori RB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Indore, 
Indore 453552, India.

Human dependence on computers is increasing day by day; thus, human interaction 
with computers must be more dynamic and contextual rather than static or 
generalized. The development of such devices requires knowledge of the emotional 
state of the user interacting with it; for this purpose, an emotion recognition 
system is required. Physiological signals, specifically, electrocardiogram (ECG) 
and electroencephalogram (EEG), were studied here for the purpose of emotion 
recognition. This paper proposes novel entropy-based features in the 
Fourier-Bessel domain instead of the Fourier domain, where frequency resolution 
is twice that of the latter. Further, to represent such non-stationary signals, 
the Fourier-Bessel series expansion (FBSE) is used, which has non-stationary 
basis functions, making it more suitable than the Fourier representation. EEG 
and ECG signals are decomposed into narrow-band modes using FBSE-based empirical 
wavelet transform (FBSE-EWT). The proposed entropies of each mode are computed 
to form the feature vector, which are further used to develop machine learning 
models. The proposed emotion detection algorithm is evaluated using publicly 
available DREAMER dataset. K-nearest neighbors (KNN) classifier provides 
accuracies of 97.84%, 97.91%, and 97.86% for arousal, valence, and dominance 
classes, respectively. Finally, this paper concludes that the obtained entropy 
features are suitable for emotion recognition from given physiological signals.

DOI: 10.3390/e24101322
PMCID: PMC9601119
PMID: 37420342

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.