1. Neuroimage. 2025 Jan;305:120986. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2024.120986. Epub 
2024 Dec 21.

Emotional pictures in the brain and their interaction with the task: A 
fine-grained fMRI coordinate-based meta-analysis study.

Mansueto SP(1), Romeo Z(2), Angrilli A(3), Spironelli C(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, via Venezia 8, 35131 
Padova, Italy.
(2)Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, via Venezia 8, 35131 
Padova, Italy; Neuroscience Institute, National Research Council (CNR), via 
Gallucci 16, 35121 Padova, Italy.
(3)Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, via Venezia 8, 35131 
Padova, Italy; Padova Neuroscience Center, University of Padova, via Orus 2/B, 
35129 Padova, Italy.
(4)Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, via Venezia 8, 35131 
Padova, Italy; Padova Neuroscience Center, University of Padova, via Orus 2/B, 
35129 Padova, Italy. Electronic address: chiara.spironelli@unipd.it.

The impacting research on emotions of the last decades was carried out with 
different methods. The most popular was based on the use of a validated sample 
of slides, the International Affective Pictures System (IAPS), divided mainly 
into pleasant, neutral and unpleasant categories, and on fMRI as a measure of 
brain activation induced by these stimuli. With the present coordinate-based 
meta-analysis (CBMA) based on ALE approach, we aimed to unmask the main brain 
networks involved in the contrast of pleasant vs. neutral and unpleasant vs. 
neutral IAPS slide categories. Furthermore, we included studies employing both 
IAPS and non-IAPS (but analogously validated) pictures, a condition termed as 
IAPS EXTENDED. After selecting 97 papers published in the 2000-2023 interval, 
the planned contrasts were analyzed by also considering their interaction with 
the Load factor of the concomitant task, which comprised the conditions: No Load 
(passive viewing), Low-Load tasks and High-Load tasks. We analyzed a total of 
152 experiments (106 focusing on the negative vs. neutral contrast; 46 reporting 
positive vs. neutral contrasts). We additionally performed conjunction and 
contrast analyses. Results confirmed outcomes of past meta-analyses on the 
involvement of a number of cortical and subcortical paralimbic and limbic 
regions during unpleasant picture processing, but the increase of the 
pubblications on this topic in last years, together with a more fine-grained 
analysis, allowed us to find also the involvement of additional areas, such as 
the right middle frontal gyrus, left inferior frontal gyrus (BA 9), posterior 
cingulate, and left inferior parietal lobule. Concerning passive viewing and 
low-load tasks, a clear frontal asymmetry emerged with greater right prefrontal 
activation (BA9) to unpleasant vs. pleasant pictures, whereas, during No Load 
tasks only, left frontal dominance to pleasant vs. unpleasant stimuli was found 
(BA13). The unpleasant vs. neutral comparison on High-Load tasks (the pleasant 
condition had an insufficient sample size) revealed a specific lateralization of 
several areas of the right hemisphere (STG-BA 38, MFG-BA 46, FG-BA 37), whereas, 
in the other load conditions, the inferior frontal gyrus was right lateralized, 
but the main activated regions were bilateral or left lateralized. Results are 
discussed considering the effects of both valence and task/load variables, and 
the involvement of hippocampus/amygdala, hemispheric asymmetries of emotions, 
the occipito-temporal areas, several sub-regions of the prefrontal/orbitofrontal 
cortex, and an extended motor network.

Copyright Â© 2024. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2024.120986
PMID: 39716521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.