1. PLoS One. 2024 Jan 22;19(1):e0296633. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0296633. 
eCollection 2024.

Perceptuo-affective organization of touched materials in younger and older 
adults.

Drewing K(1).

Author information:
(1)HapLab, Institute for Psychology, Justus-Liebig University, Giessen, Germany.

In everyday interaction we touch different materials, which we experience along 
a limited number of perceptual and emotional dimensions: For instances, a furry 
surface feels soft and pleasant, whereas sandpaper feels rough and unpleasant. 
In a previous study, younger adults manually explored a representative set of 
solid, fluid and granular materials. Their ratings were made along six 
perceptual dimensions (roughness, fluidity, granularity, deformability, 
fibrousness, heaviness) and three emotional ones (valence, arousal, dominance). 
Perceptual and emotional dimensions were systematically correlated. Here, we 
wondered how this perceptuo-affective organization of touched materials depends 
on age, given that older adults show decline in haptic abilities, in particular 
detail perception. 30 younger participants (~22 years, half females) and 15 
older participants (~66 years) explored 25 materials using 18 perceptual and 9 
emotional adjectives. We extracted 6 perceptual and 2 emotional dimensions. 
Older and younger adults showed similar dimensions. However, in younger 
participants roughness and granularity judgments were done separately, while 
they were collapsed in a single dimension in older people. Further, age groups 
differed in the perception of roughness, granularity and valence, and older 
people did not show a positive correlation between valence and granularity as 
did younger people. As expected, control analyses between young males and 
females did not reveal similar gender differences. Overall, the results 
demonstrate that older people organize and experience materials partly 
differently from younger people, which we lead back to sensory decline. However, 
other aspects of perceptual organization that also include fine perception are 
preserved into older age.

Copyright: Â© 2024 Knut Drewing. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0296633
PMCID: PMC10802953
PMID: 38252623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.