1. PLoS One. 2023 Oct 26;18(10):e0293003. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0293003. 
eCollection 2023.

Measuring novice-expert sense of place for a far-away place: Implications for 
geoscience instruction.

Gold AU(1), Geraghty Ward EM(1), Marsh CL(1), Moon TA(2), Schoeneman SW(3), Khan 
AL(4), Littrell MK(1).

Author information:
(1)Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences (CIRES), CIRES 
Education and Outreach Program, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, 
Colorado, United States of America.
(2)Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences (CIRES), 
National Snow and Ice Data Center, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, 
Colorado, United States of America.
(3)Environmental Sciences Department, Spruce W. Schoenemann, University of 
Montana Western, Dillon, MT, United States of America.
(4)Department of Environmental Science, Western Washington University, 
Bellingham, WA, United States of America.

Individuals usually develop a sense of place through lived experiences or 
travel. Here we introduce new and innovative tools to measure sense of place for 
remote, far-away locations, such as Greenland. We apply this methodology within 
place-based education to study whether we can distinguish a sense of place 
between those who have visited Greenland or are otherwise strongly connected to 
the place from those who never visited. Place-based education research indicates 
that an increased sense of place has a positive effect on learning outcomes. 
Thus, we hypothesize that vicarious experiences with a place result in a 
measurably stronger sense of place when compared to the sense of place of those 
who have not experienced the place directly. We studied two distinct groups; the 
first are people with a strong Greenland connection (experts, n = 93). The 
second are students who have never been there (novices, n = 142). Using i) 
emotional value attribution of words, ii) thematic analysis of phrases and iii) 
categorization of words, we show significant differences between novice's and 
expert's use of words and phrases to describe Greenland as a proxy of sense of 
place. Emotional value of words revealed statistically significant differences 
between experts and novices such as word power (dominance), feeling pleasantness 
(valence), and degree of arousal evoked by the word. While both groups have an 
overall positive impression of Greenland, 31% of novices express a neutral view 
with little to no awareness of Greenland (experts 4% neutral). We found 
differences between experts and novices along dimensions such as natural 
features; cultural attributes; people of Greenland; concerns, importance, or 
interest in and feeling connected to Greenland. Experts exhibit more complex 
place attributes, frequently using emotional words, while novices present a 
superficial picture of Greenland. Engaging with virtual environments may shift 
novice learners to a more expert-like sense of place, for a far-away places like 
Greenland, thus, we suggest virtual field trips can supplement geoscience 
teaching of concepts in far-away places like Greenland and beyond.

Copyright: Â© 2023 Gold et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0293003
PMCID: PMC10602358
PMID: 37883501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.