1. Sci Rep. 2025 Feb 21;15(1):6356. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-90387-4.

Behavioral (reaction time) and prefrontal cortex response revealed differences 
in grief vs. sadness perception.

Tripathi S(1), Imai H(2), Adachi I(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for the Evolutionary Origins of Human Behavior, Kyoto University, 
Inuyama Campus, Aichi, Japan. tripathisrishti021@gmail.com.
(2)Center for the Evolutionary Origins of Human Behavior, Kyoto University, 
Inuyama Campus, Aichi, Japan.

Research on basic emotions has expanded beyond the traditional six categories, 
identifying over 20 distinct emotional states. However, differentiating some 
emotions remained challenging due to partially overlapping facial expressions. 
Grief and sadness are two such emotions that are difficult to distinguish. This 
study investigated the behavioral and neural mechanisms of grief perception in 
the prefrontal cortex (PFC), comparing it with sadness. Participants categorized 
and rated emotional facial images in grief and sadness conditions on valence, 
arousal, and dominance scales. While participants perceiving emotional facial 
images prefrontal cortex (PFC) hemodynamic activities were measured using 
functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS). Explicit behavioral responses 
showed no significant differences, however implicit measures (reaction times) 
revealed distinctions between grief and sadness perception. Further fNIRS 
results indicated increased oxy-Hb in the right dorsolateral PFC for grief 
condition images compared to sadness condition images. Additionally, cultural 
differences were observed, with Asian participants showing higher oxy-Hb 
responses in the dorsal PFC for unpleasant facial stimuli in grief conditions. 
These findings support cultural variability in emotion perception and 
regulation. The combination of behavioral reaction time and neuroimaging data 
suggests distinct implicit perceptual and neural processing mechanisms for grief 
and sadness. This indicates separate automatic implicit mechanisms for these 
emotions.

Â© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-025-90387-4
PMCID: PMC11845682
PMID: 39984554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests. Ethical approval: All experiments were conducted 
in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and the Ethical Guidelines for 
Medical and Health Research Involving Human Subjects by the Japanese Ministry of 
Health, Labor, and Welfare, and approved by the Kyoto University Primate 
Research Institute Human Ethics Committee (no. 2018-16).