1. Comput Methods Biomech Biomed Engin. 2024 Jun 26:1-24. doi: 
10.1080/10255842.2024.2369257. Online ahead of print.

An improved empirical mode decomposition method with ensemble classifiers for 
analysis of multichannel EEG in BCI emotion recognition.

Samal P(1), Hashmi MF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, National Institute 
of Technology, Warangal, Telangana, India.

Emotion recognition using EEG is a difficult study because the signals' unstable 
behavior, which is brought on by the brain's complex neuronal activity, makes it 
difficult to extract the underlying patterns inside it. Therefore, to analyse 
the signal more efficiently, in this article, a hybrid model based on 
IEMD-KW-Ens (Improved Empirical Mode Decomposition-Kruskal Wallis-Ensemble 
classifiers) technique is used. Here IEMD based technique is proposed to 
interpret EEG signals by adding an improved sifting stopping criterion with 
median filter to get the optimal decomposed EEG signals for further processing. 
A mixture of time, frequency and non-linear distinct features are extracted for 
constructing the feature vector. Afterward, we conducted feature selection using 
KW test to remove the insignificant ones from the feature set. Later the 
classification of emotions in three-dimensional model is performed in two 
categories i.e. machine learning based RUSBoosted trees and deep learning based 
convolutional neural network (CNN) for DEAP and DREAMER datasets and the 
outcomes are evaluated for valence, arousal, and dominance classes. The findings 
demonstrate that the hybrid model can successfully classify emotions in 
multichannel EEG signals. The decomposition approach is also instructive for 
improving the model's utility in emotional computing.

DOI: 10.1080/10255842.2024.2369257
PMID: 38920119