1. Psychon Bull Rev. 2025 Feb;32(1):203-225. doi: 10.3758/s13423-024-02551-y.
Epub  2024 Aug 22.

The principal components of meaning, revisited.

Westbury C(1), Yang M(2), Anderson K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Alberta, P220 Biological Sciences 
Building, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2E9, Canada. chrisw@ualberta.ca.
(2)Department of Psychology, McGill University, 2001 McGill College Ave, 
Montreal, QC, H3A 1G1, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Alberta, P220 Biological Sciences 
Building, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2E9, Canada.

Osgood, Suci, and Tannebaum were the first to attempt to identify the principal 
components of semantics using dimensional reduction of a high-dimensional model 
of semantics constructed from human judgments of word relatedness. Modern 
word-embedding models analyze patterns of words to construct higher dimensional 
models of semantics that can be similarly subjected to dimensional reduction. 
Hollis and Westbury characterized the first eight principal components (PCs) of 
a word-embedding model by correlating them with several well-known lexical 
measures, such as logged word frequency, age of acquisition, valence, arousal, 
dominance, and concreteness. The results show some clear differentiation of 
interpretation between the PCs. Here, we extend this work by analyzing a larger 
word-embedding matrix using semantic measures initially derived from subjective 
inspection of the PCs. We then use quantitative analysis to confirm the utility 
of these subjective measures for predicting PC values and cross-validate them on 
two word-embedding matrices developed on distinct corpora. Several semantic and 
word class measures are strongly predictive of early PC values, including 
first-person and second-person verbs, personal relevance of abstract and 
concrete words, affect terms, and names of places and people. The predictors of 
the lowest magnitude PCs generalized well to word-embedding matrices constructed 
from separate corpora, including matrices constructed using different 
word-embedding methods. The predictive categories we describe are consistent 
with Wittgenstein's argument that an autonomous level of social interaction 
grounds linguistic meaning.

Â© 2024. The Psychonomic Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.3758/s13423-024-02551-y
PMID: 39174751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval/Consent to 
participate: Since this work relies only on computational modeling, no ethics 
approval was sought or required. Consent for publication: All authors have 
approved the publication of this manuscript in its present form. Data 
availability: All data and R files required for replicating the analyses and 
plots in this paper are available ( https://osf.io/3zrek/ ). Conflicts of 
interest: The authors declare that we have no conflicts of interest or competing 
interests. Open practices statement: The data and materials for all experiments 
are available online ( https://osf.io/3zrek ). None of the experiments was 
preregistered.