1. Cogn Emot. 2024 Oct 27:1-15. doi: 10.1080/02699931.2024.2420708. Online ahead
of  print.

An image-based investigation on color associations among 100 Chinese emotion 
words.

Dou J(1), Zhang Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chinese Language and Literature, School of Humanities, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Linguistics and Translation, City University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong, People's Republic of China.

ABSTRACTImage data serves as a valuable resource for investigating relationships 
between colors and emotions. This study conducts an image-based visual corpus 
analysis on the color associations of 100 Chinese emotion words, aiming to 
uncover the pivotal roles of colors in understanding emotional concepts. The 
study addresses two primary objectives: (i) examining the interrelations among 
four affective properties (valence, arousal, prototypicality, and emotionality) 
and four image-based color attributes (Jz: a dimension depicting black-white 
color distinction, Az: a dimension for green-red, Bz: a dimension for 
blue-yellow, and color variability) associated with these emotion words; and 
(ii) assessing the efficacy of image-based color information in profiling 
affective (dis)similarities among different emotion words. The empirical results 
reveal (i) significant positive correlations between color variability and 
arousal, Jz and valence, Az and arousal, Bz and valence, as well as a negative 
correlation between Jz and prototypicality; (ii) the effectiveness of 
image-based color information in depicting the valence-dominated affective 
(dis)similarities among the 100 Chinese emotion words. This study contributes 
image-based empirical support to complement existing research on color-emotion 
mappings. Moreover, it advances methodological approaches by advocating for the 
utilisation of image data to address theoretical inquiries in cognitive science.

DOI: 10.1080/02699931.2024.2420708
PMID: 39462760