1. PLoS One. 2024 Mar 29;19(3):e0300682. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0300682. 
eCollection 2024.

How self-states help: Observing the embodiment of self-states through nonverbal 
behavior.

Engel I(1), Dshemuchadse M(2), Surrey C(1), Roos L(1), Kanske P(1), Scherbaum 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, TUD Dresden Technical University, Dresden, Germany.
(2)Department of Social Sciences, Hochschule Zittau-Görlitz, Görlitz, Germany.

The concept of self-states is a recurring theme in various psychotherapeutic and 
counseling methodologies. However, the predominantly unconscious nature of these 
self-states presents two challenges. Firstly, it renders the process of working 
with them susceptible to biases and therapeutic suggestions. Secondly, there is 
skepticism regarding the observability and differentiation of self-states beyond 
subjective experiences. In this study, we demonstrate the feasibility of 
eliciting self-states from clients and objectively distinguishing these evoked 
self-states through the lens of neutral observers. The self-state constellation 
method, utilized as an embodied approach, facilitated the activation of diverse 
self-states. External observers then assessed the nonverbal manifestations of 
affect along three primary dimensions: emotional valence, arousal, and 
dominance. Our findings indicate that external observers could reliably discern 
and differentiate individual self-states based on the bodily displayed valence 
and dominance. However, the ability to distinguish states based on displayed 
arousal was not evident. Importantly, this distinctiveness of various 
self-states was not limited to specific individuals but extended across the 
entire recording sample. Therefore, within the framework of the self-state 
constellation method, it is evident that individual self-states can be 
intentionally evoked, and these states can be objectively differentiated beyond 
the subjective experiences of the client.

Copyright: © 2024 Engel et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0300682
PMCID: PMC10980216
PMID: 38551896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.