1. Behav Res Methods. 2025 Apr 11;57(5):143. doi: 10.3758/s13428-025-02644-z.

Psycholinguistic norms for the dominant and secondary names of 700 LinguaPix 
color photographs in Mandarin Chinese.

Chang YN(1), Cheng L(2), Wang J(3), Tsang YK(4), Krautz AE(5), Yeung SS(2), Wang 
S(6), Chen HC(7).

Author information:
(1)Miin Wu School of Computing, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Psychology, The Education University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 
S.A.R, 10 Lo Ping Road, Taipo, N.T, China.
(3)Department of Psychology, The Education University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 
S.A.R, 10 Lo Ping Road, Taipo, N.T, China. jwang@eduhk.hk.
(4)Department of Education Studies, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, 
S.A.R., China.
(5)Department of English, American and Celtic Studies, University of Bonn, Bonn, 
Germany.
(6)Philosophy and Social Science Laboratory of Reading and Development in 
Children and Adolescents (South China Normal University), Ministry of Education, 
Guangzhou, China.
(7)Department of Psychology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
S.A.R., China.

Norming studies on picture naming usually identify different correct names for 
each picture and provide more information on the dominant name (i.e., the most 
frequently produced name of a given picture) or weighted values based on all the 
names. The current study is among the first attempts to establish 
psycholinguistic norms for both the dominant and secondary names of pictures. 
The following norms in Mandarin Chinese were provided for 700 color photographs 
from the LinguaPix database: name agreement, naming latency, name length, image 
agreement, age of acquisition (AoA), and concept familiarity of the dominant and 
secondary names, as well as overall accuracy, number of names, H-statistic, 
familiarity, visual complexity, valence, and arousal of the pictures. This 
dataset increases the diversity of stimuli available for picture naming studies 
in Chinese and greatly facilitates stimuli selection by allowing researchers to 
manipulate not only common psycholinguistic properties of the dominant picture 
name but also those of the secondary name and the relations between them. The 
database is available in the Open Science Framework repository ( 
https://osf.io/5rphx/ ).

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.3758/s13428-025-02644-z
PMCID: PMC11991977
PMID: 40216696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval: The methodology 
of this study was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee of the 
Education University of Hong Kong (Ethics approval number: 2022–2023-0043). 
Consent to participate: Informed consent for participation was obtained from 
each participant before the experiment. Consent for publication: Informed 
consent for dissemination of the finding (international conferences or 
scientific journals) was obtained from each participant before the experiment. 
Conflicts of interest: The authors declare no competing financial interests.