1. Sci Rep. 2024 May 18;14(1):11397. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-62203-y.

Prosocial emotions predict individual differences in economic decision-making 
during ultimatum game with dynamic reciprocal contexts.

Kim J(1), Bong SH(1), Yoon D(1), Jeong B(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Medical Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute 
of Science and Technology (KAIST), 291, Daehak-Ro, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon, 34141, 
South Korea.
(2)Graduate School of Medical Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute 
of Science and Technology (KAIST), 291, Daehak-Ro, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon, 34141, 
South Korea. bs.jeong@kaist.ac.kr.

Social decision-making is known to be influenced by predictive emotions or the 
perceived reciprocity of partners. However, the connection between emotion, 
decision-making, and contextual reciprocity remains less understood. Moreover, 
arguments suggest that emotional experiences within a social context can be 
better conceptualised as prosocial rather than basic emotions, necessitating the 
inclusion of two social dimensions: focus, the degree of an emotion's relevance 
to oneself or others, and dominance, the degree to which one feels in control of 
an emotion. For better representation, these dimensions should be considered 
alongside the interoceptive dimensions of valence and arousal. In an ultimatum 
game involving fair, moderate, and unfair offers, this online study measured the 
emotions of 476 participants using a multidimensional affective rating scale. 
Using unsupervised classification algorithms, we identified individual 
differences in decisions and emotional experiences. Certain individuals 
exhibited consistent levels of acceptance behaviours and emotions, while 
reciprocal individuals' acceptance behaviours and emotions followed external 
reward value structures. Furthermore, individuals with distinct emotional 
responses to partners exhibited unique economic responses to their emotions, 
with only the reciprocal group exhibiting sensitivity to dominance prediction 
errors. The study illustrates a context-specific model capable of subtyping 
populations engaged in social interaction and exhibiting heterogeneous mental 
states.

Â© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-62203-y
PMCID: PMC11102497
PMID: 38762655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.