1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2023 Jun 22;13(13):2141. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics13132141.

Evaluation of Emotions from Brain Signals on 3D VAD Space via Artificial 
Intelligence Techniques.

Işık Ü(1), Güven A(2), Batbat T(2).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Engineering Graduate Program, Graduate School of Natural and 
Applied Sciences, Erciyes University, 38039 Kayseri, Türkiye.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Erciyes 
University, 38039 Kayseri, Türkiye.

Recent achievements have made emotion studies a rising field contributing to 
many areas, such as health technologies, brain-computer interfaces, psychology, 
etc. Emotional states can be evaluated in valence, arousal, and dominance (VAD) 
domains. Most of the work uses only VA due to the easiness of differentiation; 
however, very few studies use VAD like this study. Similarly, segment 
comparisons of emotion analysis with handcrafted features also use VA space. At 
this point, we primarily focused on VAD space to evaluate emotions and 
segmentations. The DEAP dataset is used in this study. A comprehensive 
analytical approach is implemented with two sub-studies: first, segmentation 
(Segments I-VIII), and second, binary cross-comparisons and evaluations of eight 
emotional states, in addition to comparisons of selected segments (III, IV, and 
V), class separation levels (5, 4-6, and 3-7), and unbalanced and balanced data 
with SMOTE. In both sub-studies, Wavelet Transform is applied to 
electroencephalography signals to separate the brain waves into their bands (α, 
β, γ, and θ bands), twenty-four attributes are extracted, and Sequential Minimum 
Optimization, K-Nearest Neighbors, Fuzzy Unordered Rule Induction Algorithm, 
Random Forest, Optimized Forest, Bagging, Random Committee, and Random Subspace 
are used for classification. In our study, we have obtained high accuracy 
results, which can be seen in the figures in the second part. The best accuracy 
result in this study for unbalanced data is obtained for Low Arousal-Low 
Valence-High Dominance and High Arousal-High Valence-Low Dominance emotion 
comparisons (Segment III and 4.5-5.5 class separation), and an accuracy rate of 
98.94% is obtained with the IBk classifier. Data-balanced results mostly seem to 
outperform unbalanced results.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics13132141
PMCID: PMC10340442
PMID: 37443535

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.